Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011) 731-817 Submi tted 8/09; Revised 11/10; Published 3/11
Information, Divergence and Risk for Binary Experiments
Mark D. Reid MARK .R EID @ANU .EDU .AU
Robert C. Williamson BOB.W ILLIAMSON @ANU .EDU .AU
Australian National University and NICTA
Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
Editor: Yoram Singer
Abstract
We unify f -divergences, Bregman divergences, surrogate regret bounds, proper scoring rules, cost
curves, ROC-curves and statistical information. We do thisby systematically studying integral and
variational representations of these objects and in so doin g identify their representation primitives
which all are related to cost-sensitive binary classiﬁcati on. As well as developing relationships
between generative and discriminative views of learning, t he new machinery leads to tight and
more general surrogate regret bounds and generalised Pinsk er inequalities relating f -divergences
to variational divergence. The new viewpoint also illumina tes existing algorithms: it provides a
new derivation of Support Vector Machines in terms of diverg ences and relates maximum mean
discrepancy to Fisher linear discriminants.
Keywords: classiﬁcation, loss functions, divergence, statistical information, regret bounds
1. Introduction
Some of the simplest machine learning problems concern binary experiments. T here it is assumed
that observations are drawn from a mixture of two distributions (one for each class). These distribu-
tions determine many important objects related to the learning problems they underpin such as risk,
divergence and information. Our aim in this paper is to present all of these objects in a coherent
framework explaining exactly how they relate to each other. Doing so brings conceptual clarity to
the area as well as providing the means for a number of new technical results.
1.1 Motivation
There are many different notions that underpin the deﬁnition of machine lea rning problems. These
include information, loss, risk, regret, ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curves and the area
under them, Bregman divergences and distance or divergence between probability distributions. On
the surface, the problem of estimating whether two distributions are the same (as measured by, say,
their Kullback-Leibler divergence) is different to the problem of minimisation of expected risk in
a prediction problem. One goal of the present paper is to show how this sup erﬁcial difference is
indeed only superﬁcial—deeper down they are the same problem and analy tical and algorithmic
insights for one can be transferred to the other.
Machine learning as an engineering discipline is still young. 1 There is no agreed language to
describe machine learning problems (such is usually done with an informal mixture of English and
1. Bousquet (2006) has articulated the need for an agreed vocabular y, a clear statement of the main problems, and to
“revisit what has been done or discovered so far with a fresh look”.
c⃝ 2011 Mark D. Reid and Robert C. Williamson.

REID AND WILLIAMSON
mathematics). There is very little in the way of composability of machine learning solu tions. That
is, given the solution to one problem, use it to solve another. Of course onewould like to not merely
be able to do this, but to be certain what one might lose in doing so. In order to do that, one needs
to be able to provide theoretical guarantees on how well the original proble m will be solved by
solving the surrogate problem. Related to these issues is the fact that there a re no well understood
primitives for machine learning. Indeed, what does that even mean? All of these iss ues are the
underlying motivation for this paper.
Our long term goal (towards which this paper is but the ﬁrst step) is to turn th e ﬁeld of ma-
chine learning into a more well founded engineering discipline with an agreed language and well
understood composition rules. Our motivation is that until one can start buildin g systems modu-
larly, one is largely restricted to starting from scratch for each new proble m, rather than obtaining
the efﬁciency beneﬁts of re-use.2
We are comparing problems, not solutions or algorithms. Whilst there have been attempts to
provide a degree of uniﬁcation at the level of algorithms (Altun and Smola, 20 06), there are in-
trinsic limits to such a research program. The most fundamental is that (surpr isingly) there is no
satisfactory formal deﬁnition of what an algorithm really is Blass and Gurevich (2003), nor how two
algorithms can be compared with a view to determining if they are the same (Blass et al., 2009).
We have started with binary experiments because they are simple and widely used. As we will
show, by pursuing the high level research agenda summarised above, w e have managed to unify
all of the disparate concepts mentioned and furthermore have simultaneously simpliﬁed and gen-
eralised two fundamental results: Pinsker inequalities between f -divergences and surrogate regret
bounds. The proofs of these new results rely essentially on the decompos ition into primitive prob-
lems.
1.2 Novelty and Signiﬁcance
Our initial goal was to present existing material in a uniﬁed way. We have inde ed done that. In
doing so we have developed new (and simpler) proofs of existing results. Additionally we have
developed some novel technical results. The key ones are:
1. A link between the weighted integral representations for proper scorin g rules and those for
f -divergences which allows the transformation from one to the other (Theorem 10);
2. A uniﬁed derivation of the integral representations in terms of Taylor se ries showing their
equivalence (Theorem 18);
2. Abelson et al. (1996) described the principles of constructing softwa re with the aid of (Locke, 1690, Chapter 12,
paragraph 1):
The acts of the mind, wherein it exerts its power over simple ideas, are chieﬂy these three: (1) Combining
several simple ideas into one compound one; and thus all complex ideas are made. (2) The second is
bringing two ideas, whether simple or complex, together, and setting them by one another, so as to take
a view of them at once, without uniting them into one; by which it gets all its ideas of relations. (3) The
third is separating them from all other ideas that accompany them in their rea l existence; this is called
abstraction: and thus all its general ideas are made
Modularity is central to computer hardware (Baldwin and Clark, 2006b,a ) and other engineering disciplines (Ger-
shenson et al., 2003) and plays a central role in some models of econo mic development (Varian, 2003; Weitzman,
1998; Mokyr, 1992). The reason modularity works is that components can be combined or composed.
732

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
3. Use of these representations to derive new bounds for divergenc es, Bayes risks and regrets:
“surrogate regret bounds”(Theorem 25) and Pinsker inequalities (Theorem 30);
4. Showing that statistical information (and hence f -divergence) are both Bregman informa-
tions;
5. The derivation of SVMs from a variational perspective which provid es a clearer explanation
of the link between MMD (Maximum Mean Discrepancy) and SVMs (Support Vector Ma-
chines) §H;
6. Explicit formulae relating Bayes risk to the Neyman-Pearson function, which allows the trans-
formation of risk curves to ROC curves and vice versa (Theorem 22).
The signiﬁcance of these new connections is that they show that the choice of loss function
(scoring rule), f -divergence and Bregman divergence (regret) are intimately related—c hoosing one
implies choices for the others. Furthermore we show there are more intuitively u sable parameter-
isations for f -divergences and scoring rules (their corresponding weight functio ns). The weight
functions have the advantage that if two weight functions match, then the cor responding objects
are identical. That is not the case for the f parameterising an f -divergence or the convex func-
tion parameterising a Bregman divergence. As well as the theoretical intere st in such connections,
these alternate representations suggest new algorithms for empirically estimatin g such quantities.
We have represented all of the connections graphically in ﬁgure 1. The various symbols are deﬁned
below; the point of the picture here is to see the overall goal of the paper— the relating of a range of
diverse concepts.
Given the broad scope of our work, there is of course much prior work, too much to summarise
in this introduction. Appendix C summarises the main precursors and related work.
1.3 Paper Outline and Key Contributions
The following is an outline of the main structure of this paper section by section h ighlighting the
contributions and novelty. A knowledgeable reader only interested in the core new results should be
able to just read Sections 4–8 plus Appendix H with the aid of Table 1. More tedious and technical
proofs and digressions are in the appendices.
§2 Many of the properties of the objects studied in this paper are directly derived from well-known
properties of convex functions. In particular, a generalised form of T aylor’s theorem and
Jensen’s inequality underpin many of the new results. Although elementary, we have started
from this point because it shows how fundamental are the connections drawn later in the paper
are. We rederive Savage’s famous theorem (Theorem 7) from our perspective.
§3 One of the simplest type of statistical problems is that of distinguishing betwee n two distribu-
tions. Such a problem is known as a binary experiment. Two classes of measures of diver-
gence between the distributions are introduced: the class of Csisz ´ar f -divergences and the
class of Bregman divergences.
§4 When additional assumptions are made about a binary experiment—speciﬁ cally, a prior proba-
bility for each of the two distributions—it becomes possible to talk about risk and statistical
information of an experiment that is deﬁned with respect to a loss function. A key resu lt is
Theorem 10 which shows that f -divergence, statistical information and Bregman divergence
are all fundamentally equivalent.
733

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Binary Experiment
(π,P,Q) = (η,M)
Distributions
P,Q
Addπ— class prior
Function Class
F
Convex function
f
Convex function
φ=
W
Binary Classiﬁcation Task
Prior Bayes RiskL
(π)
Posterior Bayes RiskL(π,P,Q)
Statistical Information
∆L
(π,P,Q) =L(π)−L(π,P,Q)
Lw(η,ˆη) =−W(ˆη) +W(ˆη)(ˆη−η)+
η(W(1) +W(0))−W(0)
Lw(η) =−W(η) +η(W(1) +W(0))−W(0)
Add a loss function
ℓ,L,L
Proper Losses:
GivenΛ : [0,1]→R,∃ℓs.t.
L
(η) = Λ(η)and
L(η,ˆη) =L(ˆη)−(ˆη−η)L′(ˆη)
f-divergence
If(P,Q) =
∫
dQf
(
dP
dQ
)
Integral Representation of
proper losses:
ℓ(η,ˆη) =
∫1
0ℓc(η,ˆη)w(c)dc
Primitive:ℓc
Weights:w(c) =L
′′(c)
fπ(t) =L(π)−(πt+ 1−π)L
(
πt
πt+1−π
)
Ifπ(P,Q) = ∆L(π,P,Q)
Lπ(η) =−1−η
1−πf
(
1−π
π
η
1−η
)
If(P,Q) =Lπ(π,P,Q)
f-divergence Integral Representation:
If(P,Q) =
∫1
0Ifπ(P,Q)γ(π)dπ
Primitive:
fπ(t) =1
2min(1−π,π)−min(1−π,πt)
Weight:γ(π) =1
π3f′′(1−π
π
)
wπ(c) =π(1−π)
ν(π,c)3γ
((1−c)π
ν(π,c)
)
γ(c) =π2(1−π)2
ν(π,c)3w
(
π(1−c)
ν(π,c)
)
where
ν(π,c) = (1−c)π+ (1−π)c.
Integral Representation in terms
of Statistical Information
If(P,Q) =
∫1
0
∆L
0−1(π,P,Q)γ(π)dπ
Primitive:∆L0−1(π,P,Q)
Weight:γ(π)
Partial Knowledge ofπ↦→∆L0−1(π,P,Q)
e.g.(πi,Vπi)n
i=1
Generalised Pinsker Bounds
If(P,Q)≥Φf((πi,Vπi))n
i=1
whereΦfonly depends onf
Bregman Divergence
Bφ(s1,s2) =
φ(s1)−φ(s2)− ⟨s1−s2,∇φ(s2)⟩
Bw(η,ˆη) =
W(η)−W(ˆη)−(η−ˆη)W(ˆη)
Bregman Information
Bφ(η(X)) = ∆L(π,P,Q)
Bregman Information = Statistical Information
BASIC ELEMENTS
Integral Probability Metric
VF(P,Q) = sup
f∈F
EPf−EQf
f-divergence
Variational Representation:
If(P,Q) = sup
r∈RX
∫
X
rdP−f∗(r)dQ
V[−1,1]X(P,Q) =It↦→|t−1|(P,Q)
Variational Divergence is
only common distance
φ=−L
Bayes Risk is a
Bregman Divergence
Regret Bounds for Surrogate Losses
Bφ(S) = inf
s∈S
Eσ[Bφ(S,s)]
=Eσ[Bφ(S,s∗)]
W=
∫
W,W=
∫
w
Bw(η,ˆη)≥ψ(c0,α)∨ψ(c0,−α),
ψ(c0,α) :=B(c0,c0+α) =L(c0)−L(c0+α) +αL′(c0)
Whenc0= 1/2andwis symmetric,
Bw(η,ˆη)≥L(1/2)−L(1/2 +α)
Neyman Pearson Functionβ(α,P,Q)
β(α) = inf
π∈(0,1]
1
π((1−π)α+π−L(π,P,Q))
L(π,P,Q) = min
α∈[0,1]
((1−π)α+π(1−β(α,P,Q))
Figure 1: Diagrammatic summary of key relationships developed in the paper.
734

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
§5 A key technique we use is that of an integral representation. We show th at integral represen-
tations of f -divergences and proper losses and statistical information are all esse ntially the
same (Theorem 18). We explicitly compare the primitives for each of these re presentations
and show their natural interpretation.
§6 The weight function view also illuminates various “graphical representa tions” of binary exper-
iments, such as ROC curves. We unify several graphical representatio ns for binary experi-
ments and present new explicit formulae relating Bayes risk to the Neyman-Pearson function,
which allows the transformation of risk curves to ROC curves and vice versa (Theorem 22).
§7 The various equivalences developed in the above sections are then u sed to derive new tight
inequalities of interest in Machine Learning, The ﬁrst is a We derive an ex plicit form for
surrogate regret bounds for proper losses in terms of the weight function corresponding to the
proper loss (Theorem 25). These are tight bounds on the conditional r isk with respect to an
arbitrary cost-sensitive misclassiﬁcation loss when all is known is the value of the conditional
risk with respect to an arbitrary proper loss. The result generalises ex isting results in two
key ways. We also generalise the classical Pinsker inequality by deriving tight bounds on an
arbitrary f -divergence when the value of several generalised variational divergences between
the same distributions is known (Theorem 30). A side-effect is an explicit formula for the best
possible bound on KL-divergence given knowledge of the classical variational divergence.
§8 Another representation of risks is a variational one. We systematically ex plore the relationship
between Bayes risk and variational divergence, building upon classical results. An interesting
consequence of our analysis is presented in Appendix H where we showthat maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD)—a kernel approach to hypothesis testing and dive rgence estimation—is
essentially SVM learning in disguise. In doing so we present a novel, simple a nd interesting
alternate derivation of the Support Vector Machine.
1.4 Notational Conventions
Here we record elementary notation and the conventions we adopt through out the paper. Key no-
tations are tabulated in table 1. We write x ∧ y := min(x,y), x ∨ y := max(x,y), (x)+ := x ∨ 0,
(x)− := x ∧ 0 and the Iverson bracket /llbracketp/rrbracket= 1 if p is true and /llbracketp/rrbracket= 0 otherwise (Knuth, 1992). The
generalised function δ(·) is deﬁned by
∫ b
a δ(x) f (x)dx = f (0) when f is continuous at 0 anda< 0< b
(Antosik et al., 1973; Friedlander, 1982). The unit step U(x) =
∫ x
−∞ δ(t)dt. The real numbers are
denoted R, the non-negative reals R+ and the extended reals
R = R ∪ {∞ }; the rules of arithmetic
with extended real numbers and the need for them in convex analysis are explained by Rockafellar
(1970). Random variables are written in sans-serif font: S, X, Y. Sets are in calligraphic font: X
(the “input” space), Y (the “label” space). Vectors are written in bold font: a,ααα,xxx ∈ Rm. We will
often have cause to take expectations (E) of various functions over the random variableX. We write
such quantities in blackboard bold: I, L, B, J. The elementary loss is ℓ, its conditional expectation
w.r.t. Y is L and the full expectation (over the joint distribution P of (X, Y)) is L. Lower bounds on
quantities with an intrinsic lower bound (e.g., the Bayes optimal loss) are written with an underbar:
L, L. Quantities related by double integration appear in this paper and we notate thestarting point in
lower case, the ﬁrst integral with upper case, and the second integral in upper case with an overbar:
w, W, W. Estimated quantities are hatted: ˆη. In several places we overload the notation. In all cases
careful attention to the type of the arguments or subscripts reliably disambiguates.
735

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Symbol Meaning Deﬁned
Iφ Perspective transform (1)
(P,Q) Binary experiment §3
ℓ Loss §4.2
L Conditional risk §4.2
L Expected risk §4.2
L Conditional Bayes risk §4.2
L Expected Bayes Risk §4.2
Jµ[φ] Jensen gap Th. 5
I f (P,Q) f -divergence between P and Q §3.2
φ♦ Csisz´ar dual of φ (2)
φ⋆ Legendre-Fenchel dual of φ (3)
Bφ Bregman divergence and regret §4.4
TPr, FNr True Positive / False Negative rate for testr (10)
β(·,P,Q) Neyman-Pearson function for (P,Q) (11)
r, τ Test, Test statistic §3.1
Bφ(P,Q) Generative Bregman divergence §3.3
P Joint distribution on X × Y §4.1
M Reference measure for (P,Q) with prior π §4.1
π A priori probability of positive class §4.1
η Probability of positive class §4.2
η (·) Conditional probability of positive class §4.2
T = (η,M;ℓ) = (π,P,Q;ℓ) Task §4.2
ˆη (·) Estimator of η (·) §4.2
Bφ(S) Bregman information of S §4.5
w(·) Weight function for proper loss §5.3
γ(·) Weight function for f -divergence §5.1
Δ L(η,M) Statistical information (20)
ℓc,Lc Cost-sensitive mis-classiﬁcation loss (29),(30)
ROC(τ) Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (37)
AUC(τ) Area Under the ROC Curve (38)
Vπ(P,Q) Generalised Variational divergence (49)
Table 1: Standard notation used throughout the paper.
2. Convex Functions and Their Representations
Many of the properties of divergences and losses are best understood through properties of the con-
vex functions that deﬁne them. One aim of this paper is to explain and relate va rious divergences
and losses by understanding the relationships between their primitive functio ns. The relevant def-
736

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
initions and theory of convex functions will be introduced as required. An y terms not explicitly
deﬁned can be found in books by Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´echal (2001) or Rockafellar (1970).
A set S ⊆ Rd is said to be convex if for all λ ∈ [0,1] and for all points s1,s2 ∈ S the point
λs1 + (1 − λ)s2 ∈ S. A function φ : S → R deﬁned on a convex set S is said to be a (proper) convex
function if3 for all λ ∈ [0,1] and points s1,s2 ∈ S the function φ satisﬁes
φ(λs1 + (1 − λ)s2) ≤ λφ(s1) + (1 − λ)φ(s2).
A function is said to be concave if −φ is convex.
The remainder of this section presents properties, representations and transformations of convex
functions that will be used throughout this paper.
2.1 The Perspective Transform and the Csisz ´ar Dual
When S = R+ and φ : R+ →
R is convex, the perspective transform of φ is deﬁned for τ ∈ R+ via
Iφ(s,τ) :=











τφ(s/τ), τ> 0,s> 0
0, τ = 0,s = 0
τφ(0), τ> 0,s = 0
sφ′
∞, τ = 0,s> 0,
(1)
where φ(0) := lims→0 φ(s) ∈
R and φ′
∞ is the slope at inﬁnity deﬁned as
φ′
∞ := lim
s→+∞
φ(s0 + s) − φ(s0)
s = lim
s→+∞
φ(s)
s
for every s0 ∈ S where φ(s0) is ﬁnite. This slope at inﬁnity is only ﬁnite when φ(s) = O(s), that
is, when φ grows at most linearly as s increases. When φ′
∞ is ﬁnite it measures the slope of the
linear asymptote. The function Iφ : [0,∞ )2 →
R is convex in both arguments (Hiriart-Urruty and
Lemar´echal, 1993b) and may take on the value +∞ when s or τ is zero. It is introduced here
because it will form the basis of the f -divergences described in the next section.4
The perspective transform can be used to deﬁne the Csisz´ar dual φ♦ : [0,∞ ) → R of a convex
function φ : R+ → R by letting
φ♦(τ) := Iφ(1,τ) = τφ
(1
τ
)
(2)
for all τ ∈ (0,∞ ) and φ♦(0) := φ′
∞ . The original φ can be recovered from Iφ since φ(s) = If (s,1).
The convexity of the perspective transform Iφ in both its arguments guarantees the convexity of
the dual φ♦. Some simple algebraic manipulation shows that for all s,τ ∈ R+
Iφ(s,τ) = Iφ♦(τ,s).
This observation leads to a natural deﬁnition of symmetry for convex functio ns. We will call a
convex function ♦-symmetric (or simply symmetric when the context is clear) when its perspective
transform is symmetric in its arguments. That is, φ is ♦-symmetric when Iφ(s,τ) = Iφ(τ,s) for all
s,τ ∈ [0,∞ ). Equivalently, φ is ♦-symmetric if and only if φ♦ = φ.
3. The restriction of the values of φ to R will be assumed throughout unless explicitly stated otherwise. This implies the
properness of φ since it cannot take on the values −∞ or +∞ .
4. The perspective transform is closely related to epi-multiplication which is deﬁned for all τ ∈ [0,∞ ) and (proper)
convex functions φ to be τ⊗ φ := s ↦→τφ(s/τ) for τ> 0 and is 0 when τ = s = 0 and +∞ otherwise. Bauschke et al.
(2008) summarise the properties of this operation and its relationship to other operations on convex functions.
737

REID AND WILLIAMSON
2.2 The Legendre-Fenchel Dual Representation
A second important dual operator for convex functions is the Legendre-Fenchel (LF) dual. The LF
dual φ⋆ of a function φ : S → R is a function deﬁned by
φ⋆(s⋆) := sup
s∈S
{⟨s,s⋆⟩− φ(s)}. (3)
The LF dual of any function is convex and, if the functionφ is convex and closed then theLF bidual
is a faithful representation of the original function. That is,
φ⋆⋆(s) = sup
s⋆∈S⋆
{⟨s⋆,s⟩− φ⋆(s⋆)} = φ(s).
When φ : S → R, S ⊆ R, is a function of a real argument s and the derivative φ′(s) exists, the
Legendre-Fenchel conjugate φ⋆ is given by theLegendre transform(Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´echal,
2001; Rockafellar, 1970)
φ⋆(s) = s ·(φ′)−1(s) − φ
(
(φ′)−1(s)
)
.
2.3 Integral Representations
In this paper we are primarily concerned with convex and concave functio ns deﬁned on subsets of
the real line. A central tool in their analysis is the integral form of their Taylo r expansion. Here, φ′
and φ′′ denote the ﬁrst and second derivatives of φ respectively.
Theorem 1 (Taylor’s Theorem) Let S = [s0,s] be a closed interval of R and let φ : S → R be
differentiable on [s0,s] and twice differentiable on (s0,s). Then
φ(s) = φ(s0) +φ′(s0)(s − s0) +
∫ s
s0
(s −t)φ′′(t)dt. (4)
The argument s appears in the limits of integral in the above theorem and consequently can
be awkward to work with. Also, it will be useful to expand φ about some point not at the end of
the interval of integration. The following corollary of Taylor’s theorem removes these problems by
introducing piecewise linear terms of the form (s −t)+ = (s −t) ∨ 0.
Corollary 2 (Integral Representation I) Suppose −∞ < a< b< ∞ and let φ : [a,b] → R be a
twice differentiable function. Then, for all s,s0 ∈ [a,b] we have
φ(s) = φ(s0) +φ′(s0)(s − s0) +
∫ b
a
φs0(s,t)φ′′(t)dt, (5)
where
φs0(s,t) :=





(s −t) s0< t ≤ s
(t − s) s< t ≤ s0
0 otherwise
is piecewise linear and convex in s for each s0,t ∈ [a,b].
738

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
This result is a consequence of the way in which φt effectively restricts the limits of integration to
the interval (s0,s) ⊆ [a,b] or (s,s0) ⊆ [a,b] depending on whether s0< s or s0 ≥ s with appropriate
reversal of the sign of (s −t).
When a = 0 and b = 1 a second integral representation for the unit interval can be derivedfrom
(5) that removes the term involving φ′.
Corollary 3 (Integral Representation II) A twice differentiable function φ : [0,1] → R can be ex-
pressed as
φ(s) = φ(0) + (φ(1) − φ(0))s −
∫ 1
0
ψ (s,t)φ′′(t)dt, (6)
where ψ (s,t) = (1 −t)s ∧ (1 − s)t is piecewise linear and concave in s ∈ [0,1] for each t ∈ [0,1].
The result follows by integration by parts of tφ′′(t). The proof can be found in Appendix A.1. It
is used in Section 5 below to obtain an integral representation of losses for b inary class probability
estimation. This representation can be traced back to Temple (1954) who note s that the kernel
ψ (s,t) is the Green’s function for the differential equationψ ′′ = 0 with boundary conditions ψ (a) =
ψ (b) = 0.
Both these integral representations state that the non-linear part of φ can be expressed as a
weighted integral of piecewise linear terms φs0 or ψ . When we restrict our attention to convex φ
we are guaranteed the “weights”φ′′(t) for each of these terms are non-negative. Since the measures
of risk, information and divergence we examine below do not depend on th e linear part of these
expansions we are able to identify convex functions with the weights w(t) = φ′′(t) that deﬁne their
non-linear part. The sets of piecewise linear functions {φs0(s,t)}t∈[a,b] and {ψ (s,t)}t∈[0,1] can be
thought of as families of “primitive” convex functions from which others can be built through their
weighted combination. Representations like these are often called Choquet representations after
work by Choquet (1953) on the representation of compact convex spaces (Phelps, 2001).
2.4 Representations for Non-Differentiable Convex Functions
It is possible to weaken the conditions on the representation results so they hold for continuous but
not necessarily differentiable functions. As much of this paper deals with f unctions that fall into
this category—namely general convex functions—being able to generalise these results is essen-
tial in order to understand the weight functions corresponding to the primitiv e f -divergences and
loss functions. We will brieﬂy discuss these generalisations and introduce s ome conventions for
interpreting subsequent results in an effort to avoid too many distracting technicalities.
The convention for the remainder of this paper is that the ﬁrst derivative of a convex func-
tion φ over R is to be interpreted as a right derivative. That is, we will take φ′(t) to be φ′
+(t) :=
limε↓0
φ(t)−φ(t+ε)
ε . Theorem 24.1 of Rockafellar (1970) guarantees that this derivative exists and
is non-decreasing and right continuous on the domain of φ. It is therefore possible to deﬁne a
Lebesgue-Stieltjes measure λφ((a,b]) := φ′(b) − φ′(a) for intervals in the domain of φ.
Second derivatives of convex φ are only ever used within integrals to “weight” the contribution
of the non-negative, piecewise linear functions φs0(·,t) and ψ (·,t) discussed above. Thus, we write∫ b
a f (t)φ′′(t)dt as a short-hand for the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral
∫ b
a f (t)dλφ(t). For simplicity,
we will often speak of weight “functions” being equal to the second deri vative of general convex
functions. As we only ever consider linear operators on these weight functions, it is unproblematic to
treat second derivatives as Schwartz distributions or “generalised fu nctions” (Antosik et al., 1973;
739

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Friedlander, 1982) and add, scale, and evaluate them like normal functio ns. The most exotic of
these we will consider explicitly are the weight functions corresponding to th e primitive φs0 and ψ
functions. They correspond to Dirac delta distributions δ(·) as deﬁned in Section 1.4.
As Liese and Vajda (2006) carefully show, it is possible to derive gener alised versions of the
integral representations using the interpretations above. Of course, wh en the functions φ are twice
differentiable these interpretations and generalised results coincide with those for the usual ﬁrst and
second derivatives.
2.5 Bregman Divergence
Bregman divergences are a generalisation of the notion of distances between points. Given a differ-
entiable5 convex function φ : S → R and two points s0,s ∈ S the Bregman divergence6 of s from s0
is deﬁned to be
Bφ(s,s0) := φ(s) − φ(s0) − ⟨s − s0,∇φ (s0)⟩, (7)
where ∇φ (s0) is the gradient of φ at s0. A concise summary of many of the properties of Bregman
divergences is given by Banerjee et al. (2005b, Appendix A); see a lso Censor and Zenios (1997).
In particular, Bregman divergences always satisfy Bφ(s,s0) ≥ 0 and Bφ(s0,s0) = 0 for all s,s0 ∈ S,
regardless of the choice of φ. They are not always metrics, however, as they do not always satisfy
the triangle inequality and their symmetry depends on the choice of φ.
When S = R and φ is twice differentiable, comparing the deﬁnition of a Bregman divergence in
(7) to the integral representation in (4) reveals that Bregman divergences between real numbers can
be deﬁned as the non-linear part of the Taylor expansion of φ. Rearranging (4) shows that for all
s,s0 ∈ R ∫ s
s0
(s −t)φ′′(t)dt = φ(s) − φ(s0) − (s − s0)φ′(s0) = Bφ(s,s0) (8)
since ∇φ = φ′ and the inner product is simply multiplication over the reals. This result also hold s
for more general convex sets S. Importantly, it intuitively shows why the following holds (because
the Bregman divergence depends only on the nonlinear part of the Taylor expansion).
Theorem 4 Let φ and ψ both be real-valued, differentiable convex functions over the convex set S
such that φ(s) = ψ (s) +as + b for some a,b ∈ R. Then, for all s and s0, Bφ(s,s0) = Bψ (s,s0).
A proof can be obtained directly by substituting and expanding ψ in the deﬁnition of a Bregman
divergence.
Equation 8 also shows why B(s,s0) is decreasing as |s − s0| decreases (a fact we will exploit
later): since φ′′(t) ≥ 0 for all t, if s0< s, then the integrand in (8) is always non-negative and the
result is immediate by the nature of integration. If s0> s, a similar argument holds.
2.6 Jensen’s Inequality and the Jensen Gap
A central inequality in the study of convex functions is Jensen’s inequality.It relates the expectation
of a convex function applied to a random variable to the convex function evaluated at its mean. We
will denote by Eµ [·] :=
∫
S ·dµ expectation over S with respect to a probability measure µ over S.
5. Technically, φ need only be differentiable on the relative interior ri(S) of S. We omit this requirement for simplicity
and because it is not relevant to this discussion.
6. Named in reference to Bregman (1967) although he was not the ﬁrst to consider such an equation, at least in the one
dimensional case; confer Brunk et al. (1957, p.838).
740

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Theorem 5 (Jensen’s Inequality) Let φ : S → R be a convex function, µ be a distribution andS be
an S-valued random variable (measurable w.r.t. µ) such thatEµ [|S|]< ∞ . Then
Jµ[φ] := Eµ [φ(S)] − φ(Eµ [S]) ≥ 0. (9)
The proof is straight-forward and can be found in (Dudley, 2003, §10 .2). Jensen’s inequality can
also be used to characterise the class of convex functions. If φ is a function such that (9) holds for
all random variables and distributions then φ must be convex.7 Intuitively, this connection between
expectation and convexity is natural since expectation can be seen as an operator that takes convex
combinations of random variables.
We will call the differenceJµ[φ] the Jensen gap for φ when S ∼ µ. Many measures of divergence
and information studied in the subsequent sections can be expressed as th e Jensen gap of some
convex function. Due to the linearity of expectation, the Jensen gap is insensitive to the addition of
afﬁne terms to the convex function that deﬁnes it:
Theorem 6 Let φ : S → R be convex function and S and µ be as in Theorem 5. Then for each
a,b ∈ R the convex function ψ (s) := φ(s) +as + b satisﬁes Jµ[φ(S)] = Jµ[ψ (S)].
The proof is a consequence of the deﬁnition of the Jensen gap and the line arity of expectations
and can be found in Appendix A.2. An implication of this theorem is that when co nsidering sets
of convex functions as parameters to the Jensen gap operator they only n eed be identiﬁed by their
non-linear part. Thus, the Jensen gap operator can be seen to impose an equivalence relation over
convex functions where two convex functions are equivalent if they have the same Jensen gap, that
is, if their difference is afﬁne.
In light of the two integral representations in Section 2.3, this means the Jensen gap only depends
on the integral terms in (5) and (6) and so is completely characterised by the w eights provided by
φ′′. Speciﬁcally, for suitably differentiable φ : [a,b] → R we have
Jµ[φ(S)] =
∫ b
a
Jµ[φs0(S,t)]φ′′(t)dt.
Since several of the measures of divergence, information and risk we analyse can be expressed as a
Jensen gap, this observation implies that these quantities can be identiﬁed with the weights provided
by φ′′ as it is these that completely determine the measure’s behaviour.
3. Binary Experiments and Measures of Divergence
The various properties of convex functions developed in the previous s ection have many implica-
tions for the study of statistical inference. We begin by consideringbinary experiments (P,Q) where
P and Q are probability measures8 over a common spaceX. We will considerP the distribution over
positive instances and Q the distribution over negative instances. The densities of P and Q with re-
spect to some third reference distribution M over X will be deﬁned by dP = pdM and dQ = qdM
respectively. Unless stated otherwise we will assume that P and Q are both absolutely continuous
7. This can be seen by considering a distribution with a ﬁnite, discrete set of points as its support and applying Theo-
rem 4.3 of Rockafellar (1970).
8. We intentionally avoid too many measure theoretic details for the sake of cla rity. Appropriate σ-algebras and conti-
nuity can be assumed where necessary.
741

REID AND WILLIAMSON
with respect to M. (One can always choose M to ensure this by setting M := (P + Q)/2; but see the
next section.)
There are several ways in which the “separation” of P and Q in a binary experiment can be
quantiﬁed. Intuitively, these all measure the difﬁculty of distinguishing betwe en the two distri-
butions using instances drawn from their mixture. The further apart the dis tributions are the easier
discrimination becomes. This intuition is made precise through the connections withrisk and MMD
later in Appendix H.
A central statistic in the study of binary experiments and statistical hypothesis te sting is the
likelihood ratio dP/dQ. As the following section outlines, the likelihood ratio is, in the sense of
preserving the distinction between P and Q, the “best” mapping from an arbitrary space X to the
real line.
3.1 Statistical Tests and the Neyman-Pearson Lemma
In the context of a binary experiment (P,Q), a statistical test is any function that assigns each
instance x ∈ X to either P or Q. We will use the labels 1 and 0 for P and Q respectively and so a
statistical test is any function r : X → {0,1}. In machine learning, a function of this type is usually
referred to as a classiﬁer. The link between tests and classiﬁers is explored further in Section 4.
Each test r partitions the instance space X into positive and negative prediction sets:
X+
r := {x ∈ X : r(x) = 1},
X−
r := {x ∈ X : r(x) = 0}.
There are four classiﬁcation rates associated with these predictions sets: the true positive rate (TP),
true negative rate (TN), false positive rate (FP) and the false negative rate (FN). For a given test r
they are deﬁned as follows:
TPr := P(X+
r ), FPr := Q(X+
r ),
FNr := P(X−
r ), TNr := Q(X−
r ). (10)
The subscript r will be dropped when the test is clear by the context. SinceP and Q are distributions
over X = X+
r ∪ X−
r and the positive and negative sets are disjoint we have that TP + FN = 1 and
FP + TN = 1. As a consequence, the four values in (10) can be summarised by choo sing one from
each column.
Often, statistical tests are obtained by applying a threshold τ0 to a real-valued test statistic
τ : X → R. In this case, the statistical test is r(x) = /llbracketτ(x) ≥ τ0/rrbracket. This leads to parameterised forms
of prediction sets Xy
τ(τ0) := Xy
/llbracketτ≥τ0/rrbracketfor y ∈ {+, −}, and the classiﬁcation rates TP τ(τ0), FPτ(τ0),
TNτ(τ0), and TPτ(τ0) which are deﬁned analogously. By varying the threshold parameter a range of
classiﬁcation rates can be achieved. This observation leads to a well known graphical representation
of test statistics known as the ROC curve, which is discussed further in Section 6.1.
A natural question is whether there is a “best” statistical test or test statistic to u se for binary
experiments. This is usually formulated in terms of a test’s power and size. Thepower βr of the test
r for a particular binary experiment (P,Q) is a synonym for its true positive rate (that is, βr := TPr
and so 1 − βr := FNr9) and the size α r of same test is just its false positive rate α r := FPr. Here,
9. This is opposite to the usual deﬁnition of βr in the statistical literature. Usually, 1− βr is used to denote the power of
a test. We have chosen to useβr for the power (true positive rate) as this makes it easier to compare with ROC curves
and it is consistent with the usage of Torgersen (1991).
742

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
“best” is considered to be the most powerful (MP) test of a given size (Bickel and Doksum, 2001,
§4.2). That is, a test r is considered MP of sizeα ∈ [0,1] if, α r = α and for all other testsr′ such that
α r′ ≤ α we have 1 − βr ≤ 1 − βr′. We will denote by β(α ) := β(α,P,Q) the true positive rate of an
MP test between P (the alternative hypothesis) and Q (the null hypothesis) at Q with signiﬁcance α .
Torgersen (1991) calls β(·,P,Q) the Neyman-Pearson function for the dichotomy (P,Q). Formally,
for each α ∈ [0,1], the Neyman-Pearson function β measures the largest true positive rate TP r of
any measurable classiﬁer r : X → {−1,1} that has false positive rate FPr at most α . That is,
β(α ) = β(α,P,Q) := sup
r∈{−1,1}X
{TPr : FP r ≤ α }. (11)
The Neyman-Pearson lemma (Neyman and Pearson, 1933) shows that the likelihood ratio τ∗(x) =
dP/dQ(x) is the most powerful test for each choice of threshold τ0. Since each choice of τ0 ∈ R
results in a test /llbracketdP/dQ ≥ τ0/rrbracketof some size α ∈ [0,1] we have that10
β(FPτ∗(τ0)) = TPτ∗(τ0) (12)
and so varying τ0 over R results in a maximal ROC curve. This too is discussed further in Sec-
tion 6.1.
The Neyman-Pearson lemma thus identiﬁes the likelihood ratio dP/dQ as a particularly useful
statistic. Given an experiment (P,Q) it is, in some sense, the best mapping from the space X to the
reals. The next section shows how this statistic can be used as the basis for a variety of divergence
measures between P and Q.
3.2 Csisz ´ar f -divergences
The class of f -divergences(Ali and Silvey, 1966; Csisz´ar, 1967) provide a rich set of relations that
can be used to measure the separation of the distributions in a binary experiment. An f -divergence
is a function that measures the “distance” between a pair of distributions P and Q deﬁned over a
space X of observations. Traditionally, the f -divergence of P from Q is deﬁned for any convex
f : (0,∞ ) → R such that f (1) = 0. In this case, the f -divergence is
I f (P,Q) = EQ
[
f
(dP
dQ
)]
=
∫
X
f
(dP
dQ
)
dQ (13)
when P is absolutely continuous with respect to Q and equals ∞ otherwise.11
The above deﬁnition is not completely well-deﬁned as the behaviour of f is not speciﬁed at the
endpoints of (0,∞ ). This is remedied via the perspective transform of f , introduced in Section 2.1
above which deﬁnes the limiting behaviour of f . Given convex f : (0,∞ ) → R such that f (1) = 0
the f -divergence of P from Qis
I f (P,Q) := EM [If (p,q)] = EX∼M [If (p(X),q(X))], (14)
where If is the perspective transform of f (see (1)).
10. Equation (43) in Section 6.3 below, shows that β(α ) is the lower envelope of a family of linear functions of α and is
thus concave and continuous. Hence, the equality in (12) holds.
11. Liese and Miescke (2008, pg. 34) give a deﬁnition that does not re quire absolute continuity.
743

REID AND WILLIAMSON
The restriction that f (1) = 0 in the above deﬁnition is only present to normalise I f so that
I f (Q,Q) = 0 for all distributions Q. We can extend the deﬁnition of f -divergences to all convex f
by performing the normalisation explicitly. Since f (EQ [dP/dQ]) = f (1) this is done most conve-
niently through the deﬁnition of the Jensen gap for the function f applied to the random variable
dP/dQ with distribution Q. That is, for all convex f : (0,∞ ) → R and for all distributions P and Q
JQ
[
f
(dP
dQ
)]
= I f (P,Q) − f (1). (15)
Due to the issues surrounding the behaviour of f at 0 and ∞ the deﬁnitions in (13), (14) and (15)
are not entirely equivalent. When it is necessary to deal with the limiting behav iour, the deﬁnition
in (14) will be used. However, the version in (15) will be most useful whe n drawing connections
between f -divergences and various deﬁnitions of information in Section 4 below.
Several properties of f -divergence can be immediately obtained from the above deﬁnitions. The
symmetry of the perspective If in (2) means that
I f (P,Q) = I f ♦(Q,P) (16)
for all distributions P and Q, where f ♦ is the Csisz ´ar dual of f . The non-negativity of the Jensen
gap ensures that I f (P,Q) ≥ 0 for all P and Q. Furthermore, the afﬁne invariance of the Jensen gap
(Theorem 6) implies the same afﬁne invariance for f -divergences.
Several well-known divergences correspond to speciﬁc choices ofthe function f (Ali and Silvey,
1966, §5). One divergence central to this paper is the variational divergence V (P,Q) which is
obtained by setting f (t) = |t − 1| in Equation 14. It is the only f -divergence that is a true metric on
the space of distributions over X (Khosravifard et al., 2007) and gets its name from its equivalent
deﬁnition in the variational form
V (P,Q) = 2∥P − Q∥∞ := 2 sup
A⊆X
|P(A) − Q(A)|.
(Some authors deﬁne V without the 2 above.) This form of the variational divergence is discusse d
further in Section 8. Furthermore, the variational divergence is one of a family of “primitive” f -
divergences discussed in Section 5. These are primitive in the sense thatall other f -divergences can
be expressed as a weighted sum of members from this family.
Another well known f -divergence is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence KL(P,Q), obtained
by setting f (t) = t ln(t) in Equation 14. Others are given in Table 2 in Section 5.4.
3.3 Generative Bregman Divergences
Another measure of the separation of distributions can be deﬁned as the ex pected Bregman diver-
gence between the densities p and q with respect to the reference measure M. Given a convex
function φ : R+ → R the generative Bregman divergencebetween the distributions P and Q is (con-
fer (14))
Bφ(P,Q) := EM
[
Bφ(p,q)
]
= EX∼M
[
Bφ(p(X),q(X))
]
.
We call this Bregman divergence “generative” to distinguish it from the “discriminative” Bregman
divergence introduced in Section 4 below, where the adjectives “gener ative” and “discriminative”
are explained further.
744

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Csisz´ar (1995) notes that there is only one divergence common to the class off -divergences and
the generative Bregman divergences. In this sense, these two classesof divergences are “orthogonal”
to each other. Their only common point is when the respective convex func tions satisfy f (t) =
φ(t) = t lnt − at + b (for a,b ∈ R) in which case both I f and Bφ are the KL divergence.
4. Risk and Statistical Information
The above discussion of f -divergences assumes an arbitrary reference measure M over the space
X to deﬁne the densities p and q. In the previous section, the choice of reference measure was
irrelevant since f -divergences are invariant to this choice.
In this section an assumption is made that adds additional structure to the relation ship between
P and Q. Speciﬁcally, we assume that the reference measure M is a mixture of these two distribu-
tions. That is, M = πP + (1 − π)Q for some π ∈ (0,1). In this case, by construction, P and Q are
absolutely continuous with respect to M. Intuitively, this can be seen as deﬁning a distribution over
the observation space X by ﬁrst tossing a coin with a bias π for heads and drawing observations
from P on heads or Q on tails.
This extra assumption allows us to interpret a binary experiment (P,Q) as a generalised super-
vised binary task (π,P,Q) where the positive (y = 1) and negative (y = −1) labels y ∈ Y := {−1,1}
are paired with observations x ∈ X through a joint distribution P over X × Y. (We formally deﬁne
a task later in terms of an experiment plus loss function.) Given an observatio n drawn from X ac-
cording to M, it is natural to try to predict its corresponding label or estimate the probability it was
drawn from P.
Below we will introduce risk, regret, and proper losses and show how these relate to discrimina-
tive Bregman divergence. We then show the connection between the generative view (f -divergence
between the class conditional distributions) and Bregman divergence.
4.1 Generative and Discriminative Views
Traditionally, the joint distribution P of inputs x ∈ X and labels y ∈ Y is used as the starting point
for analysing risk in statistical learning theory. In order to better link risks to divergences, in our
analysis we will consider two related representations of P.
The generative view decomposes the joint distributionP into two class-conditional distributions
deﬁned as P(X) := P(X|y = 1), Q(X) := P(X|y = −1) for all X ⊆ X and a mixing probability or
prior π := P(X,y = 1). The discriminative representation decomposes the joint distribution into an
observation distribution M(X) := P(X, Y) for all X ⊆ X and an observation-conditional density or
posterior η (x) = dH
dM (x) where H(X) := P(X,y = 1). The terms “generative” and “discriminative”
are used here to suggest a distinction made by Ng and Jordan (2002): in the generative case, the aim
is to model the class-conditional distributions P and Q and then use Bayes rule to compute the most
likely class; in the discriminative case the focus is on estimating η (x) directly. Although we are not
directly interested in this paper in the problems of modelling or estimating we ﬁnd the distinction a
useful one.12
12. The generative-discriminative distinction usually refers to whether o ne is modelling the process that generates each
class-conditional distribution, or instead wishes solely to perform well on a discrimination task (Drummond, 2006;
Lasserre et al., 2006; Minka, 2005; Rubinstein and Hastie, 1997). Th ere has been some recent work relating the two
in the sense that if the class conditional distributions are well estimated then will one perform well in discrimination
(Long and Servedio, 2006; Long et al., 2006; Goldberg, 2001; Palmer and Goldberg, 2006).
745

REID AND WILLIAMSON
0
Density 
X
π dP 
(1 − π )dQ 
dQ 
dP 
0
Density 
X
dM 
η
Figure 2: The generative and discriminative view of binary experiments.
Both these decompositions are exact since P can be reconstructed from either. Also, translating
between them is straight-forward, since
M = πP + (1 − π)Q and η = π dP
dM,
so we will often swap between (η,M) and (π,P,Q) as arguments to functions for risk, divergence
and information. A graphical representation of the generative and discr iminative views of a binary
experiment is shown in Figure 2.
The posterior η is closely related to the likelihood ratio dP/dQ in the supervised binary task
setting. For each choice of π ∈ (0,1) this relationship can be expressed by a mapping λπ : [0,1] →
[0,∞ ] and its inverse λ−1
π deﬁned by
λπ(c) := 1 − π
π
c
1 − c, (17)
λ−1
π (t) = πt
πt + 1 − π
for all c ∈ [0,1) and t ∈ [0,∞ ), and λπ(1) := ∞ . Thus
η = λ−1
π
(dP
dQ
)
and, conversely, dP
dQ = λπ(η ).
These will be used later when relating f -divergences and risk.
4.2 Estimators and Risk
We will call a (M-measurable) function ˆη : X → [0,1] a class probability estimator. Overloading the
notation slightly, we will also use ˆη = ˆη (x) ∈ [0,1] to denote an estimate for a speciﬁc observation
x ∈ X. Many of the subsequent arguments rely on this conditional perspective.
Estimate quality is assessed using a loss functionℓ : Y × [0,1] → ¯R and the loss of the estimate
ˆη with respect to the label y ∈ Y is denotedℓ(y, ˆη ). If η ∈ [0,1] is the probability of observing the
label y = 1 then the point-wise risk of the estimate ˆη ∈ [0,1] is deﬁned to be the η-average of the
point-wise loss for ˆη:
L(η, ˆη ) := EY∼η [ℓ(Y, ˆη)] =ℓ(0, ˆη)(1 − η ) +ℓ(1, ˆη)η. (18)
746

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
(This is what Steinwart 2006 calls theinner risk.) When η : X → [0,1] is an observation-conditional
density, taking the M-average of the point-wise risk gives the (full) risk of the estimator ˆη:
L(η, ˆη,M) := EM [L(η, ˆη )] = EX∼M[L(η (X), ˆη(X))]
=
∫
X
L(η (x), ˆη(x))dM(x) =: L(π, ˆη,P,Q).
The convention of using ℓ, L and L for the loss, point-wise and full risk is used throughout this
paper. Any names or parameters associated toℓ will be propagated to L and L.
We call the combination of a loss ℓ and the distribution P a task and denote it discriminatively
as T = (η,M;ℓ) or generatively as T = (π,P,Q;ℓ). A natural measure of the difﬁculty of a task is
its minimal achievable risk, or Bayes risk:
L(η,M) = L(π,P,Q) := inf
ˆη ∈[0,1]X
L(η, ˆη,M) = EX∼M [L(η (X))],
where
[0,1] ∋ η ↦→L(η ) := inf
ˆη ∈[0,1]
L(η, ˆη )
is the point-wise Bayes risk . Note the use of the underline on L and L to indicate that the corre-
sponding functions L and L are minimised.
4.3 Proper Losses
If ˆη is to be interpreted as an estimate of the true positive class probability η then it is desirable to
require that L(η, ˆη ) be minimised when ˆη = η for all η ∈ [0,1]. Losses that satisfy this constraint
are said to be Fisher consistent and are known as proper scoring rules (Buja et al., 2005; Gneiting
and Raftery, 2007). To use common machine learning terminology we will refer to Fisher consistent
losses as proper losses. This implies that a proper lossℓ satisﬁes L
(η ) = L(η,η ) for all η ∈ [0,1].
There are a few properties of losses that we will require to establish certain key theorems below.
The ﬁrst of these is that we will say a loss is fair whenever η ↦→ℓ(0,η ) and η ↦→ℓ(1,η ) are,
respectively, right continuous at 0 and left continuous at 1, and
ℓ(0,0) =ℓ(1,1) = 0.
That is, no loss incurred for perfect prediction and there are no sudd en “jumps” in penalty for
near-perfect prediction. The main place fairness is relied upon is in the inte gral representation of
Theorem 16 where it is used to get rid of some constants of integration. In o rder to explicitly
construct a proper loss from its associated “weight function” as shown in Theorem 17 we will
require that the loss be deﬁnite, that is, its point-wise Bayes risk at 0 and 1 must be bounded from
below:
L(0)> −∞ , L(1)> −∞.
Since properness of a loss ensuresL(η ) = L(η,η ) we see that a fair proper loss is necessarily deﬁnite
since L(0,0) =ℓ(0,0) = 0> −∞ , and similarly for L(1,1). Conversely, if a proper loss is deﬁnite
then the ﬁnite valuesℓ(0,0) andℓ(1,1) can be subtracted fromℓ(0, ·) andℓ(1, ·) to make it fair.
Finally, for Theorem 7 below to hold at the endpoints of the unit interval we require a loss to be
regular, that is,
lim
η ց0
ηℓ(1,η ) = lim
η ր1
(1 − η )ℓ(0,η ) = 0. (19)
747

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Intuitively, this condition ensures that making mistakes on events that never happen should not incur
a penalty. It is not difﬁcult to show that any fair, deﬁnite loss is also regular (thus, a proper and fair
loss is also regular) but the converse does not hold. Since properness and fairness imply deﬁniteness
and regularity, most of the situations we consider in the remainder of this pape r will involve losses
which are both proper and fair.
Proper losses for probability estimation and surrogate margin losses (confer Bartlett et al. 2006)
for classiﬁcation are closely related. (Surrogate margin losses are cons idered in more detail in
Appendix D.) Buja et al. (2005) note that “the surrogate criteria of classiﬁ cation are exactly the
primary criteria of class probability estimation” and that most commonly used surr ogate margin
losses are just proper losses mapped from [0,1] to R via a link function. The main exceptions are
hinge losses; 13 Buja et al. (2005, pg. 4) state that SVMs are “the only case that truly bypa sses
estimation of class probabilities and directly aims at classiﬁcation.” However, c ommonly used
margin losses of the formφ(yF(x)) are a more restrictive class than proper losses since, as Buja et al.
(2005, §23) note, “[t]his dependence on the margin limits all theory and pra ctice to a symmetric
treatment of class 0 and class 1”. The relation between link functions, prop er losses and margin
losses is considered in more detail by Reid and Williamson (2010).
The following important property of proper losses seems to be originally due to Savage (1971).
It shows that a proper loss is completely characterised by a concave function deﬁning its point-wise
Bayes risk along with a simple structural relationship between its point-wise risk and Bayes risk.
Theorem 7 A loss functionℓ is proper if and only if its point-wise Bayes risk L (η ) is concave and
for each η, ˆη ∈ (0,1)
L(η, ˆη ) = L( ˆη ) + (η − ˆη )L′( ˆη ).
Furthermore ifℓ is regular this characterisation also holds at the endpoints η, ˆη ∈ {0,1}.
For general concave functions L which may not be differentiable, (−L)′ is to be taken to be a
right derivative as discussed in Section 2.4. The following proof uses a n argument in Buja et al.
(2005, §17) for the forward direction and the generalised Taylor’s theorem due to Liese and Vajda
(2006) for the converse.
Proof By deﬁnition, the point-wise Bayes risk L
(η ) = inf ˆη L(η, ˆη ) which, for each η ∈ [0,1] is just
the lower envelope of the lines L(η, ˆη ) = ( 1 − η )ℓ(0, ˆη) + ηℓ(1, ˆη ) and thus L is concave.14 The
properness ofℓ means L(η ) = L(η,η ) and the ˆη-derivative of L is 0 when ˆη = η. Hence
∂
∂ ˆη L(η, ˆη )
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
ˆη =η
= (1 − η )ℓ′(0,η ) +ηℓ′(1,η ) = 0
for all η ∈ [0,1]. Using this and expanding L
′(η ) via the product rule, a little algebra showsL′(η ) =
ℓ(1,η ) −ℓ(0,η ). Thus
L( ˆη ) + (η − ˆη )L′( ˆη ) = ( 1− ˆη )ℓ(0, ˆη) + ˆηℓ(1, ˆη ) + (η − ˆη)[ℓ(1, ˆη) −ℓ(0, ˆη)]
= ( 1 − η )ℓ(0, ˆη) +ηℓ(1, ˆη),
which is the deﬁnition of L(η, ˆη ). The result holds at the endpoints if the loss is regular by applying
the assumptions in (19).
13. And powers of absolute divergence |y − r|α for α ̸= 2.
14. Since this argument made no use of the properness ofℓ we see the concavity of the Bayes risk holds for any loss.
748

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Conversely, now suppose Λ is a concave function and let ℓ(y, ˆη ) = Λ ( ˆη ) + (y − ˆη )Λ ′( ˆη ). The
Taylor expansion of Λ is
Λ (η ) = Λ ( ˆη ) + (η − ˆη )Λ ′( ˆη ) +
∫ η
ˆη
(η − c)Λ ′′(c)dc
and so
L(η, ˆη ) = Λ ( ˆη ) −
∫ η
ˆη
(η − c)Λ ′′(c)dc ≥ Λ (η ) = L(η )
because the concavity of Λ means Λ ′′ ≤ 0 and so the integral term is positive and is minimised to 0
when ˆη = η. This showsℓ is proper, completing the proof.
This characterisation of the concavity of L means proper losses have a natural connection to
Bregman divergences.
4.4 Discriminative Bregman Divergence
Recall from Section 2.5 that if S ⊆ Rd is a convex set, then a convex function φ : S → R deﬁnes a
Bregman divergence
Bφ(s,s0) := φ(s) − φ(s0) − ⟨s − s0,∇φ (s0)⟩.
When S = [0,1], the concavity of L
means φ(s) = −L(s) is convex and so induces the Bregman
divergence15
Bφ(s,s0) = −L(s) +L(s0) − (s0 − s)L′(s0) = L(s,s0) − L(s)
by Theorem 7. The converse also holds. Given a Bregman divergence Bφ over S = [0,1] the convex-
ity of φ guarantees that L = −φ is concave. Thus, we know that there is a proper loss ℓ with Bayes
risk equal to −φ. As noted by Buja et al. (2005, §19), the difference
Bφ(η, ˆη ) = L(η, ˆη ) − L(η )
is also known as the point-wise regret of the estimate ˆη w.r.t. η. The corresponding (full) regret is
the M-average point-wise regret
EX∼M[Bφ(η (X), ˆη (X))] = L(η, ˆη,M) − L(η,M).
4.5 Bregman Information
Banerjee et al. (2005a) recently introduced the notion of the Bregman information Bφ(S) of a ran-
dom variable S drawn according to some distributionσ over S. It is the minimal σ-average Bregman
divergence that can be achieved by an element s∗ ∈ S (the Bregman representative). In symbols,
Bφ(S) := inf
s∈S
ES∼σ
[
Bφ(S,s)
]
= ES∼σ
[
Bφ(S,s∗)
]
.
The authors show that the mean ¯ s := ES∼σ [S], is the unique Bregman representative. That is,
Bφ(S) = Eσ [Bφ(S, ¯s)]. Surprisingly, this minimiser only depends on S and σ, not the choice of φ
15. Technically, S is the 2-simplex {(s1,s2) ∈ [0,1]2 : s1 +s2 = 1} but we identify s ∈ [0,1] with (s,1 −s). Also, we once
again interpret (−L)′ as a right derivative for general concave L as discussed in Section 2.4.
749

REID AND WILLIAMSON
deﬁning the divergence and is a consequence of Jensen’s inequality a nd the form of the Bregman
divergence.
Since regret is a Bregman divergence, it is natural to ask what is the cor responding Bregman
information. In this case, φ = −L and the random variable S = η (X) ∈ [0,1], where X ∈ X is
distributed according to the observation distribution M. Noting that EX∼M[η (X)] = π, the proof of
the following theorem stems from the deﬁnition of Bregman information and some s imple algebra
showing that infη L(η,π,M) = L(π,M), since by assumptionℓ is a proper loss.
Theorem 8 Supposeℓ is a proper loss. Given a discriminative task (η,M) and letting φ = −L, the
corresponding Bregman information of η (X) satisﬁes
Bφ(η (X)) = Bφ(η,M) := L(π,M) − L(η,M).
4.6 Statistical Information
The reduction in risk (from prior π ∈ [0,1] to posterior η ∈ [0,1]X)
Δ L
(η,M) = Δ L(π,P,Q) := L(π,M) − L(η,M) (20)
is known as statistical information and was introduced by DeGroot (1962) motivated by Lindley
(1956). This reduction can be interpreted as how much risk is removed by k nowing observation-
speciﬁc class probabilities η rather than just the prior π.
DeGroot originally introduced statistical information in terms of what he called a n uncertainty
function which, in the case of binary experiments, is any function U : [0,1] → [0,∞ ). The statistical
information is then the average reduction in uncertainty which can be expressed as a concave Jensen
gap
−JM[U(η )] = JM[−U(η )] = U(EX∼M [η (X)]) − EX∼M [U(η (X))].
DeGroot noted that Jensen’s inequality implies that for this quantity to be non- negative the uncer-
tainty function must be concave, that is, −U must be convex.
Theorem 8 shows that statistical information is a Bregman information and corr esponds to the
Bregman divergence obtained by settingφ = −L. This connection readily shows that Δ L(η,M) ≥ 0
(DeGroot, 1962, Thm 2.1) since the minimiser of the Bregman information is π = EX∼M[η (X)]
regardless of loss and Bφ(η,π) ≥ 0 since it is a regret.
4.7 Unifying Information and Divergence
From a generative perspective,f -divergences can be used to assess the difﬁculty of a learning task by
measuring the divergence between the class-conditional distributions P and Q. The more divergent
the distributions for the two classes, the easier the classiﬁcation task. ¨Osterreicher and Vajda (1993,
Thm 2) made this relationship precise by showing thatf -divergence and statistical information have
a one-to-one correspondence:
Theorem 9 If (π,P,Q;ℓ) is an arbitrary task and L
is the associated conditional Bayes risk then
deﬁning
f π(t) := L(π) − (πt + 1 − π)L
( πt
πt + 1 − π
)
(21)
750

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
for π ∈ [0,1] implies f π is convex, f π(1) = 0 and
If π (P,Q) = Δ L(π,P,Q)
for all distributions P and Q. Conversely, if f is convex and f (1) = 0 then deﬁning
Lπ(η ) := −1 − η
1 − π f
(1 − π
π
η
1 − η
)
, π ∈ [0,1]
implies
If (P,Q) = Δ Lπ(π,P,Q)
for all distributions P and Q, where Δ Lπ is the statistical information associated with Lπ.
The proof, given in Appendix A.3, is a straight-forward calculation that e xploits the relation-
ships between the generative and discriminative views presented earlier. Combined with the link
between Bregman and statistical information, this result means that they and f -divergences are in-
terchangeable as measures of task difﬁculty. The theorem leads to some correspondenc es between
well known losses and divergence: log-loss with KL (P,Q); square loss with triangular discrimina-
tion; and 0-1 loss with V (P,Q). (See Section 5.5 for an explicitly worked out example.)
This connection generalises the link between f -divergences and F-errors (expectations of con-
cave functions of η) in Devroye et al. (1996) and can be compared to the more recent work o f
Nguyen et al. (2005) who show that each f -divergence corresponds to the negative Bayes risk for a
family of surrogate margin losses. The one-to-many nature of their result may seem at odds with the
one-to-one relationship here. However, the family of margin losses givenin their work can be recov-
ered by combining the proper losses with link functions. Working with properlosses also addresses
a limitation pointed out by Nguyen et al. (2005, pg. 14), namely that “asymmetric f -divergences
cannot be generated by any (margin-based) surrogate loss function” and extends their analysis “to
show that asymmetric f -divergences can be realized by general (asymmetric) loss functions”.
4.8 Summary
The main results of this section can be summarised as follows.
Theorem 10 Let f : R+ → R be a convex function and for each π ∈ [0,1] deﬁne for c ∈ [0,1):
φ(c) := 1 − c
1 − π f (λπ(c)),
L(c) := −φ(c),
where λπ is deﬁned by (17). Then for every binary experiment (P,Q) we have
I f (P,Q) = Δ L(η,M) = Bφ(η,M),
where M := πP + (1 − π)Q, η := πdP/dM and L is the expectation (in X) of the conditional Bayes
risk L. Equivalently,
JQ[ f (dP/dQ)] = JM[−L(η )] = JM[φ(η )].
751

REID AND WILLIAMSON
What this says is that for each choice of π the classes of f -divergences I f , statistical informations
Δ L and (discriminative) Bregman informations Bφ can all be deﬁned in terms of the Jensen gap of
some convex function. Additionally, there is a bijection between each of these classes due to the
mapping λπ that identiﬁes likelihood ratios with posterior probabilities.
The class of f -divergences is “more primitive” than the other measures since its deﬁnition does
not require the extra structure that is obtained by assuming that the refere nce measure M can be
written as the convex combination of the distributions P and Q. Indeed, each I f is invariant to the
choice of reference measure and so is invariant to the choice of π. The results in the next section
provide another way of looking at this invariance ofI f . In particular, we see that every f -divergence
is a weighted “average” of statistical informations or, equivalently,I f π divergences.
5. Primitives and Weighted Integral Representations
When given a class of functions like f -divergences, risks or measures of information it is natural to
ask what the “simplest” elements of these classes are. We would like to know wh ich functions are
“primitive” in the sense that they can be used to express other measures bu t themselves cannot be
so expressed.
The connections between risk, f -divergence, and statistical information discussed in Section 4
are all in terms of the convex functions that deﬁne each type of measuremen t. As discussed in
Section 2.3, integral representations allow these convex functions to be expressed as weighted com-
binations of simple, convex, piecewise linear functions. By thinking of the se t of these simple
functions as a “basis” for convex functions, we are able to identify any c onvex function with its
“coordinates”—that is, its weight function—relative to this basis.
The main result of this section essentially “lifts” this weight function represen tation of convex
functions through the deﬁnitions of proper risks and f -divergence (and therefore also statistical
and Bregman information) so they can be expressed as weighted integrals o f primitive elements
corresponding to the simple convex functions acting as the “basis”. In the c ase of f -divergences
and information the weight function in these integrals completely determines their b ehaviour. This
means the weight functions can be used as a proxy for the analysis of thes e measures, or as a knob
the user can adjust in choosing what to measure.
We also show that the close relationships between information and f -divergence in terms of
their convex generators can be directly translated into a relationship between the respective weight
functions associated with these measures. That is, given the weight func tion that determines an
f -divergence there is, for each choice of the prior π, a simple transformation that yields the weight
function for the corresponding statistical information, and vice versa.
This shift from “function as graph of evaluations” to “function as weighte d combination of
primitive functions” permeates the remainder of the paper and is (loosely!) a nalogous to the way
the Fourier transform represents functions as sums of simple, periodic sig nals. In Section 6, risk
curves are used to graphically summarise the values of all the primitive risks f or a given binary
experiment. In Section 7, surrogate regret bounds for proper losses and a tight generalisation of
Pinsker’s inequality are derived by considering the relationship between general regrets or diver-
gences and the primitive ones comprising them. In both cases, the bounds are established by using
weight functions to understand the relative contribution of each primitive to th e weighted sum. In
particular, the Pinkser-like inequalities in Appendix B for speciﬁc f -divergences are obtained via
direct manipulation of their weight functions.
752

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
5.1 Integral Representations of f -divergences
The following result shows that the class off -divergences (and, by the result of the previous section,
statistical and Bregman information) is closed under conic combination.
Theorem 11 For all convex functions f1, f2 : (0,∞ ) → R and all α 1,α 2 ∈ [0,∞ ), the function
(0,∞ ) ∋ t ↦→g(t) := α 1 f1(t) +α 2 f2(t) (22)
is convex. Furthermore, for all distributions P and Q, we have
Ig(P,Q) = α 1I f1(P,Q) +α 2I f2(P,Q). (23)
Conversely, given f 1, f 2, α 1 and α 2, if (23) holds for all P and Q then g must be, up to afﬁne
additions, of the form (22).
The proof is a straight-forward application of the deﬁnition of convexity and of f -divergences.
One immediate consequence of this result is that the set of f -divergences is closed under conic
combinations ∑ i α iI fi. Furthermore, the arguments in Section 2.4 can be used to extend this obser-
vation beyond ﬁnite linear combination to generalised weight functions α . By Corollary 2, if f is a
convex function then expanding it about 1 in (5) and setting α (s) = f ′′(s) means that
I f (P,Q) =
∫ ∞
0
IFs(P,Q)α (s)ds (24)
where Fs(t) = /llbrackets ≤ 1/rrbracket(s − t)+ + /llbrackets> 1/rrbracket(t − s)+.16 The functions Fs, s ∈ R+ can therefore be seen
as the generators of the class of primitive f -divergences. As a function of t, each Fs is piecewise
linear, with a single “hinge” at s. Of course, any afﬁne translation of any Fs is also a primitive. In
fact, each Fs may undergo a different afﬁne translation without changing the f -divergence I f . The
weight function α is what completely characterises the behaviour of I f .
The integral in (24) need not always exist since the integrand may not be integrable. When the
Cauchy Principal Value diverges we say the integral takes on the value ∞ . We note that many (not
all) f -divergences can sometimes take on inﬁnite values.
The integral form in (24) can be readily transformed into an integral repr esentation that does
not involve an inﬁnite integrand. This is achieved by mapping the interval [0,∞ ) onto [0,1) via the
change of variables π = 1
1+s ∈ [0,1]. In this case, s = 1−π
π and so ds = − dπ
π2 and the integral of (24)
becomes
I f (P,Q) = −
∫ 0
1
IF1−ππ
(P,Q)α ( 1−π
π )π−2 dπ
=
∫ 1
0
I ˜fπ (P,Q)γ(π)dπ (25)
where
˜fπ(t) := πF1−π
π
(t) =
{
(1 − π(1 +t))+, π ≥ 1
2
(π(1 +t) − 1)+, π< 1
2
(26)
16. Technically, one must assume that f is twice differentiable for this result to hold. However, the convexity of f
implies it has well-deﬁned one-sided derivatives f ′+ and α (s) can be expressed as the measure corresponding to
d f ′+/dλ for the Lebesgue measure λ. Details can be found in Liese and Vajda (2006). The representation of ageneral
f -divergence in terms of elementary ones is not new; see for example ¨Osterreicher and Feldman (1981) and Feldman
and ¨Osterreicher (1989).
753

REID AND WILLIAMSON
and
γ(π) := 1
π3 f ′′
(1 − π
π
)
.
This observation forms the basis of the following restatement of a theorem by Liese and Vajda
(2006). We include it here with a short proof to discuss the connection be tween f -divergences and
statistical information.17
Theorem 12 Let f be convex such that f (1) = 0. Then there exists a (generalised) function γ :
(0,1) → R such that, for all P and Q:
I f (P,Q) =
∫ 1
0
I fπ (P,Q)γ(π)dπ, where f π(t) = (1 − π) ∧ π − (1 − π) ∧ (πt).
Proof The earlier discussion giving the derivation of Equation (25) implies the res ult. The only
discrepancy is over the form of fπ. We determine the precise form by noting that the family of
˜fπ given in (26) can be transformed by afﬁne addition without affecting the r epresentation of I f .
Speciﬁcally,
fπ(t) := ( 1 − π) ∧ π − (1 − π) ∧ (πt)
=
{
(1 − π(1 +t))+, π ≥ 1
2
(π(1 +t) − 1)+ + π(1 −t), π< 1
2
= ˜fπ(t) +/llbracketπ< 1
2 /rrbracketπ(1 −t),
and so ˜fπ and fπ are in the same afﬁne equivalence class for eachπ ∈ [0,1]. Thus, by Theorem 6 we
have I fπ = I ˜fπ for each π ∈ [0,1], proving the result.
The speciﬁc choice of fπ in the above theorem from all of the afﬁne equivalents was made to
make simpler the connection between integral representations for losses an d f -divergences, dis-
cussed in Section 5.4.
One can easily verify that fπ are convex hinge functions of t with a hinge at 1−π
π and fπ(1) =
0. Thus {I fπ }π∈(0,1) is a family of primitive f -divergences; confer ¨Osterreicher and Feldman
(1981) and Feldman and ¨Osterreicher (1989). This theorem implies an existing representation of
f -divergences due to ¨Osterreicher and Vajda (1993, Theorem 1) and Gutenbrunner (1990 ). They
show that an f -divergence can be represented as a weighted integral of statistical inf ormations for
0-1 loss: for all P,Q
I f (P,Q) =
∫ 1
0
Δ L0−1(π,P,Q)γ(π)dπ, (27)
γ(π) = 1
π3 f ′′
(1 − π
π
)
. (28)
An f divergence is symmetric if I f (P,Q) = I f (Q,P) for all P,Q. The representation of I f in
terms of γ and Theorem 15 provides an easy test for symmetry:
17. The 1/π3 term in the deﬁnition of γ seems a little unusual at ﬁrst glance. However, it is easily understood as the
product of two terms: 1 /π2 from the second derivative of (1 − π)/π, and 1/π from a transformation of variables
within the integral to map the limits of integration from (0,∞ ) to (0,1) via λπ.
754

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Corollary 13 Suppose I f is an f -divergence with corresponding weight function γ given by (28).
Then I f is symmetric iff γ(π) = γ(1 − π) for all π ∈ [0,1].
The proof is in Appendix A.4.
Corollary 13 provides a way of generating all convex f such that I f is symmetric that is sim-
pler than that proposed by Hiriart-Urruty and Mart ´ınez-Legaz (2007): let γ(π) = β(π ∧ (1 − π))
where β ∈ (R+)[0, 1
2 ] (i.e., all symmetric weight functions) and generate f from γ by inverting (28);
explicitly,
f (s) =
∫ s
0
(∫ t
0
1
(τ+ 1)3 γ
( 1
τ+ 1
)
dτ
)
dt, s ∈ R+.
5.2 Proper Losses and Cost-Weighted Risk
We now consider a representation of proper losses in terms of primitive loss es that originates with
Shuford et al. (1966). Our discussion follows that of Buja et al. (2005 ) and then examines its
implications in light of the connections between information and divergence just presented.
The cost-weighted losses are a family of losses parameterised by a false positive cost c ∈ [0,1]
that deﬁnes a loss for y ∈ {±1} and ˆη ∈ [0,1] by
ℓc(y, ˆη ) = c/llbrackety = −1/rrbracket/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket+ (1 − c)/llbrackety = 1/rrbracket/llbracketˆη < c/rrbracket. (29)
Intuitively, a cost-weighted loss thresholds ˆη at c and assigns a cost if the resulting classiﬁcation
disagrees with y. These correspond to the “signatures” for eliciting the probabilityη as described by
Lambert et al. (2008). Substituting c = 1
2 will verify that 2ℓ 1
2
is equivalent to 0-1 misclassiﬁcation
lossℓ0−1. Taking expectations with respect to Y we have
Lc(η, ˆη ) = (1 − η )c/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket+ η (1 − c)/llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket. (30)
We will use Lc, Lc and Δ Lc to denote the cost-weighted point-wise risk, full risk and statistical
information associated with each cost-weighted loss. The following theorems c ollect some useful
observations about these primitive quantities. The ﬁrst shows that the poin t-wise Bayes risk is a
simple, concave “tent” function. The second shows that cost-weighted sta tistical information is
invariant under the switching of the classes provided the costs are also switched and that π and 1−c
are interchangeable.
Theorem 14 For allη,c ∈ [0,1] the point-wise Bayes risk L
c(η ) = (1 −η )c ∧ (1 −c)η and is there-
fore concave in both c and η.
Proof From the deﬁnition ofℓc in Equation 29 and the deﬁnition of point-wise Bayes risk, we have,
for η ∈ [0,1],
Lc(η ) = inf
ˆη ∈[0,1]
Lc(η, ˆη )
= inf
ˆη ∈[0,1]
{(1 − η )c/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket+ η (1 − c)/llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket}
= inf
ˆη ∈[0,1]
{η (1 − c) + (c − η )/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket},
where the last step makes use of the identity /llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket= 1 − /llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket. Since (c − η ) is negative if and
only if η > c, the inﬁmum is obtained by having /llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket= 1 if and only if η ≥ c, that is, by letting
755

REID AND WILLIAMSON
ˆη = η. In this case, when ˆη ≥ c we haveLc(η ) = c(1−η ) and when ˆη< c we haveLc(η ) = (1−c)η.
The concavity of Lc is evident as this function is the minimum of two linear functions ofc and η.
Theorem 15 For all c∈ [0,1] and tasks (η,M;ℓc) = (π,P,Q;ℓc) the statistical information satisﬁes
1)
Δ Lc(1 − η,M) = Δ L1−c(η,M),
or equivalently,
Δ Lc(1 − π,Q,P) = Δ L1−c(π,P,Q);
and 2)
Δ Lπ(1 − c,P,Q) = Δ Lc(1 − π,P,Q).
Proof By Theorem 14 we know Lc(η ) = min{(1 − η )c, (1 − c)η } and so Lc(1 − η ) = L1−c(η ) for
all η,c ∈ [0,1]. Therefore, Lc(1 − η,M) = L1−c(η,M) for any η : X → [0,1] including the con-
stant function EM[η ]. By deﬁnition, Δ Lc(η,M) = L(EM[η ],M) − L(η,M) and so Δ L1−c(η,M) =
Δ Lc(1 − η,M) proving part 1.
Part 2 also follows from Theorem 14 by noting that Lc(1 − π) = Lπ(1 − c) and EM[Lc(η )] =∫
X min{(1 − c)π dP, (1 − π)cdQ }.
5.3 Integral Representations of Proper Losses
The cost-weighted losses are primitive in the sense that they form the basis f or a Choquet integral
representation of proper losses. This representation is essentially a consequence of Taylor’s theorem
and was originally studied by Shuford et al. (1966) and later generalised by Schervish (1989). The
recent presentation of this result by Lambert et al. (2008) gives yet a more general formulation
in terms of the elicitability of properties of distributions, along with a geometric deri vation. An
historical summary of decompositions of scoring rules is given by Winkler et al. (1990, Section 4).
Theorem 16 Letℓ : Y × [0,1] → R be a fair, proper loss. Then for each ˆη ∈ (0,1) and y ∈ Y
ℓ(y, ˆη ) =
∫ 1
0
ℓc(y, ˆη )w(c)dc (31)
where the weight function18 w : (0,1) → R+ satisﬁes
w(c) = −L
′′(c) ≥ 0 (32)
for all c ∈ (0,1). Conversely, ifℓ is deﬁned by (31) for some weight function w : (0,1) → R+ then it
is proper.
The proof is almost a direct consequence of Taylor’s theorem.
18. The weight function and second derivative of −L are to be interpreted distributionally as discussed in Section 2.4.
756

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Proof We ﬁrst assume ℓ is a proper loss so that L(η, ˆη ) = EY∼η [ℓ(Y, ˆη)] and L(η ) = L(η,η ).
Expanding L(η ) about ˆη ∈ (0,1) using Corollary 2 yields
L(η ) = L( ˆη ) + (η − ˆη )L′( ˆη ) +
∫ 1
0
φc(η, ˆη )L′′(c)dc
= L(η, ˆη ) +
∫ 1
0
φc(η, ˆη )L′′(c)dc (33)
by Theorem 7. The generalised function w(c) = −L′′(c) ≥ 0 by the concavity of L. Rearranging
(33) gives
L(η, ˆη ) = L(η ) +
∫ 1
0
φc(η, ˆη )w(c)dc.
The deﬁnition of L in (18) implies L(y, ˆη ) =ℓ(y, ˆη ) for y ∈ {0,1} and so
ℓ(y, ˆη ) = L(y) +
∫ 1
0
φc(y, ˆη )w(c)dc, (34)
where
φc(y, ˆη ) = /llbracketˆη ≤ c< y/rrbracket(y − c) +/llbrackety ≤ c< ˆη /rrbracket(c − y),
which is equal to the deﬁnition of ℓc in (29) since the left (resp. right) term is only non-zero when
y = 1 (resp. y = 0). Observe that L(0) = L(1) = 0 since L(0) = L(0,0) = ℓ(0,0) = 0 by the
assumption that the loss is fair, and similarly for L(1).
This shows that (34) is equivalent to (31), completing the forward direction of the theorem.
If we now assume the function w ≥ 0 is given and ℓ deﬁned as in (31) then it sufﬁces to show
L(η ) = L(η,η ). First note that
L(η, ˆη ) = EY∼η
[ ∫ 1
0
ℓc(Y, ˆη )w(c)dc
]
=
∫ 1
0
Lc(η, ˆη )w(c)dc.
Each of the Lc are proper and so are minimised when ˆη = η. Since w(c) ≥ 0 this must also be
sufﬁcient to minimise L.
We will writeℓw, Lw and Lw to explicitly indicate the parameterisation of the loss, conditional
loss and expected loss by the weight function w. A proper loss ℓw corresponding to a given weight
function can be explicitly derived using the following theorem.
Theorem 17 Given a weight function w: [0,1] → R+, let W(t) =
∫ t w(c)dc and
W (t) =
∫ t W (c)dc.
Then the lossℓw deﬁned by
ℓw(y, ˆη ) = −W ( ˆη ) − (y − ˆη )W ( ˆη )
is a proper loss. Additionally, if W (0) and W (1) are both ﬁnite then
(y, ˆη ) ↦→ℓw(y, ˆη ) + (W (1) −W (0))y +W (0) (35)
is a fair, proper loss.
757

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Proof First we deﬁne the loss
ℓ(y, ˆη ) :=
∫ 1
0
ℓc(y, ˆη )w(c)dc
and proceed to show it is equal to the deﬁnition of ℓw. Theorem 16 guarantees that ℓ is proper and
that w = −L′′. By deﬁnition of the improper integrals W and W and the fundamental theorem of
calculus we know that W ′ = w = −L′′ and so W ′(t) = W (t) = −L′(t) +a and
W (t) = −L(t) +at + b, (36)
where a,b ∈ R are constants of integration. Substituting these into the Savage representatio n of
Theorem 7 for proper losses we see that
L(η, ˆη ) = L( ˆη ) + (η − ˆη )L′( ˆη )
= −W ( ˆη ) +a ˆη + b + (η − ˆη )[−W ( ˆη ) +a]
= −W ( ˆη ) − (η − ˆη )W ( ˆη ) +aη + b.
Since L(y, ˆη ) =ℓ(y, ˆη ) for y ∈ {0,1} we haveℓ(0, ˆη ) =ℓw(0, ˆη ) +b andℓ(1, ˆη ) =ℓw(1, ˆη ) +a + b
for all a,b ∈ R. Choosing a = b = 0 achieves the result.
If W (0) and W (1) are both ﬁnite then letting a = W (1) −W (0) and b = W (0) means (36) im-
plies W (0) = −L(0) +W (0) and so L(0) = 0. Similarly, L(1) = 0 showing that (35) is fair.
As an example of how this theorem lets us explicitly construct proper losses from weight func-
tions, consider the weight function w(c) = 1. In this case, W (t) = t and W (t) = t2
2 . Thus, noting
that y2 = y for y ∈ {0,1} we have
ℓw(y, ˆη ) = − 1
2 ˆη 2 − (y − ˆη ) ˆη + 1
2y = 1
2 ( ˆη − y)2
which is the square loss.
As a second example, consider w(c) = 1
(1−c)c. In this case, W (t) = ln
( t
1−t
)
and W (t) = (1 −
t)ln(1 − t) + t ln(t). Since lim ε→0 εln(ε) = 0 we deﬁne 0ln (0) := 0 so that b = W (0) = 0 and
a = W (1) −W (0) = 0. This implies
ℓw(y, ˆη ) = −(1 − ˆη )ln(1 − ˆη ) − ˆη ln( ˆη ) − (y − ˆη )ln
( ˆη
1 − ˆη
)
= [ −(1 − ˆη) + (y − ˆη )]ln(1 − ˆη ) + [− ˆη − (y − ˆη )]ln( ˆη )
= −(1 − y)ln(1 − ˆη ) − yln( ˆη )
which is log loss.
5.4 Relating Integral Representations for L and I f
There is also the following direct relationship between the weight functions γ for an f -divergence
and w for the corresponding statistical information. Since the weight functions ar e an attractive
parameterization, it is convenient to be able to directly translate between the two respective weight
functions. The proof is in Appendix A.5.
758

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Theorem 18 Let f : R+ → R be convex (with f (1) = 0) deﬁne I f with corresponding weight func-
tion γ. Then for each π ∈ (0,1) the weight function w π in Theorem 16 for the loss ℓπ given by
Theorem 9 satisﬁes
wπ(c) = π(1 − π)
ν(π,c)3 γ
((1 − c)π
ν(π,c)
)
or, inversely,
γ(c) = π2(1 − π)2
ν(π,c)3 w
(π(1 − c)
ν(π,c)
)
,
where ν(π,c) = (1 − c)π + (1 − π)c.
The representation (27,28) allows the determination of weights for standard f -divergences.
Kullback-Liebler divergence KL(P,Q) corresponds to γ(π) = 1
π2(1−π). Thus J(P,Q) = KL(P,Q) +
KL(Q,P) corresponds to γ(π) = 1
π2(1−π)2 . Several f -divergences are presented with their corre-
sponding weight function in Table 2. The weight for KL (P,Q) has a double pole at π = 0 which is
why KL-divergence is hard to estimate—it puts a lot of weight on Δ L0−1(π,PQ) for π ≈ 0 which by
Theorem 15 means a lot of weight on Δ Lc( 1
2 ) for c ≈ 1 which requires a good estimate of Lc(η,M)
which is difﬁcult with modest data sample sizes.19
A loss function corresponding to each f -divergence in Table 2 is also shown. The weight func-
tion w(c) for the loss is for the case whenπ = 1
2, that is, it is a loss for a binary classiﬁcation problem
with equal proportions of positive and negative examples. In this case, th e relationship between w
and γ simpliﬁes to w
1
2 (c) = 2γ(1 − c) since ν( 1
2,c) = 1
2c + 1
2 (1 − c) = 1
2.
The entries in Table 2 without a name for the loss correspond to losses that a re not deﬁnite. It
turns out that weight functions whose tail behaviour is not o(c−2) or o((1 − c)−2) as c goes to 0 or
1, respectively (confer Buja et al., 2005, §6) imply non-deﬁniteness of a proper loss.
5.5 Example—Squared Loss
We illustrate some of the above concepts with a simple example. Consider squared loss. We have
L(η, ˆη ) = ˆη 2(1 − η ) + (ˆη − 1)2η
and thus L
(η ) = L(η,η ) = η (1 −η ) and L′′(η ) = −2 and thus by (32) w(η ) = 2. From (21) we thus
have
f π(t) = π(1 − π)(πt + 1 − π) − (1 − π)πt
πt + 1 − π .
Choosing π = 1
2 this becomes f
1
2 (t) = 1−t
4t+4. One can check that 8 ·f
1
2 (t) +t − 1 = (t−1)2
t+1 which
agrees with the f corresponding to Triangular Discrimination in Table 2. Scaling is just a questio n
of normalisation and we have already seen that I f is insensitive to afﬁne offsets in f . This illus-
trates the awkwardness of parameterising I f in terms of f : at ﬁrst sight 1−t
4t+4 and (t−1)2
t+1 seem quite
19. Considering KL-divergence from the weight function perspective suggests a scheme to estimate it: avoid attempting
to estimate the regions near zero and one where the weight function diver ges. A particular example of this is the
divergence KLε(P,Q) which has weight function γ(π) = 1
π2(1−π) /llbracketπ ∈ [ε,1 − ε]/rrbracket. The corresponding f can be worked
out but has the rather less intuitively clear form f (t) = /llbrackett< ε
1−ε/rrbracket(t(ln( ε
1−ε) +1) − ε
1−ε) + /llbracketε
1−ε ≤ t ≤ 1−ε
ε /rrbrackett lnt +
/llbracket1−ε
ε < t/rrbracket(t(ln( 1−ε
ε ) +1) − 1−ε
ε ), ε ∈ [0,1). This approach to regularizing the estimation of the KL-divergence was
suggested by Gutenbrunner (1990, page 454).
759

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Symbol Divergencef(t)γ(π)w
1
2(c)ℓ(0,ˆη)ℓ(1,ˆη)Loss
V(P,Q)Variational|t−1|16δ
(
π−1
2
)
32δ
(1
2−c
)
16/llbracketˆη>1
2/rrbracket16/llbracketˆη≤1
2/rrbracket0-1
KL(P,Q)Kullback-Leiblertlnt1
π2(1−π)
2
(1−c)2c2
[
2ln(1−ˆη) +ˆη
1−ˆη
]
2
[
ln1−ˆη
ˆη−1
]
—
Δ(P,Q)Triangular(t−1)2/(t+1)8 16 8ˆη28(1−ˆη)2Square
Discrimination
I(P,Q)Jensen-Shannont
2ln
(t
t+1
)
−1
2ln
(t+1
4
)1
2π(1−π)
1
(1−c)c−ln(1−ˆη)−ln(ˆη)Log
T(P,Q)Arith.-Geo. Mean
(t+1
2
)
ln
(
t+1
2√t
)
2π2−2π+1
4π2(1−π)2
2c2−2c+1
2c2(1−c)2
1
2
[
ln((1−ˆη)ˆη)−1−2ˆη
1−ˆη
]
1
2
[
ln((1−ˆη)ˆη) +1−2ˆη
ˆη
]
—
J(P,Q)Jeffreys(t−1)ln(t)1
π2(1−π)2
2
(1−c)2c22
[
ln
(
ˆη
1−ˆη
)
+1
1−ˆη
]
2
[
ln
(
1−ˆη
ˆη
)
+1
ˆη
]
—
h2(P,Q)Hellinger(√t−1)21
2[π(1−π)]3/2
1
[(1−c)c]3/22
√
ˆη
1−ˆη2
√
1−ˆη
ˆηBoosting
χ2(P,Q)Pearsonχ2(t−1)22
π3
4
(1−c)322ˆη−1
(1−ˆη)2
4
1−ˆη—
Ψ(P,Q)Symmetricχ2(t−1)2(t+1)
t
2
π3+2
(1−π)3
4
(1−c)3+4
c323ˆη−2
(1−ˆη)2ˆη21−3ˆη
(1−ˆη)ˆη2—
Table 2: Divergences and their corresponding functionsfand weightsγalong with the weightswand partial losses—see Section 5.4 ;
confer Taneja (2005a); Liese and Vajda (2006). Topsøe (2000) callsC(P,Q) =2I(P,Q)and˜C(P,Q) =2T(P,Q)the Capacitory
and Dual Capacitory discrimination respectively. Several of the above divergences are “symmetrised” versions of others. For
example,T(P,Q) =1
2[KL(P+Q
2,P) +KL(P+Q
2,Q)],I(P,Q) =1
2[KL(P,P+Q
2) +KL(Q,P+Q
2)], J(P,Q) =KL(P,Q) +KL(Q,P), and
Ψ(P,Q) =χ2(P,Q) +χ2(Q,P). The Boosting loss is also know as the “exponential” loss (Buja et al., 2005). Losses without a name
are all indeﬁnite losses and the forms given forℓ(y,·)in these cases are not normalised.
.
760

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
different. Using weight functions automatically ﬁlters out the effect of any afﬁne offsets—if the
weight functions corresponding to f1 and f2 match, then I f1 = I f2. Finally observe that substituting
γ(π) = 8 from the table into Theorem 18 we obtainw
1
2 (c) = 1/4
ν(π,c)3 ·8 = 2, consistent with the weight
obtained above.
6. Graphical Representations
The last section described representations of risks and f -divergences in terms of weighted integrals
of primitive functions. The values of the primitive functions lend themselves to a graphical inter-
pretation that is explored in this section. In particular, a diagram called a risk curve is introduced.
Risk curves are a useful aid to intuition when reasoning about risks, div ergences and information
and they are used in Section 7 to derive bounds between various divergences and risks.
Risk curves are closely related to the cost curves of Drummond and Holte (2006) as well as
idealised receiver operating characteristic, or ROC curves (Fawcett, 2004). Proposition 20 makes
this latter relationship explicit via a point-line duality between risk and ROC curve s. Additionally,
results about the Neyman-Pearson function by Torgersen (1981) allowus to establish a transforma-
tion between suitably smooth maximal ROC and minimal risk curves in Theorem 22. D espite the
close ties between f -divergences and risks, and between risk curves and ROC curves, we show in
Proposition 19 that the area under an ROC curve cannot be interpreted as an f -divergence.
6.1 ROC Curves
Plotting a receiver operating characteristic curveor ROC curveis a way of graphically summarising
the performance of a test statistic. Recall from Section 3.1 that in the contextof a binary experiment
(P,Q) on a spaceX, a test statisticτ is any function that maps points inX to the real line. Each choice
of threshold τ0 ∈ R results in a classiﬁerr(x) = /llbracketτ(x) ≥ τ0/rrbracketand its corresponding classiﬁcation rates.
An ROC curve for the test statistic τ is simply a plot of the true positive rate of these classiﬁers as a
function of their false positive rate as the threshold τ0 varies over R. Formally,
ROC(τ) := {(FPτ(τ0),TPτ(τ0)) : τ0 ∈ R} ⊂ [0,1]2. (37)
A graphical example of an ROC curve is shown as the solid black line in Figure 3.
For a ﬁxed experiment (P,Q), the Neyman-Pearson lemma provides an upper envelope for ROC
curves. It guarantees that the ROC curve for the likelihood ratio τ∗ = dP/dQ will lie above, or
dominate, that of any other test statistic τ as shown in Figure 3. This is an immediate consequence
of the likelihood ratio being the most powerful test since for each false pos itive rate (or size) α it
will have the largest true positive rate (or power) β of all tests (Eguchi and Copas, 2001). Thus
ROC(dP/dQ) is the maximal ROC curve.
The performance of a test statistic τ shown in an ROC curve is commonly summarised by
the Area Under the ROC Curve , AUC(τ), and is closely related to the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon
statistic. Formally, if (P,Q) is a binary experiment and τ a test statistic the AUC is
AUC(τ) :=
∫ 1
0
βτ(α )dα (38)
=
∫ ∞
−∞
TPτ(τ0)FP′
τ(τ0)dτ0, (39)
761

REID AND WILLIAMSON
10
1
False Positive Rate (FP) 
True Positive Rate (TP) 
τ
τ ∗
Figure 3: Example of an ROC diagram showing an ROC curve for an arbitra ry statistical test τ
(middle, bold curve) as well as an optimal statistical testτ∗ (top, grey curve). The dashed
line represents the ROC curve for a random, or uninformative statistical test.
where βτ(α ) = TPτ(τ0) for a τ0 ∈ R such that FPτ(τ0) = α .
In Section 3.1 the Neyman-Pearson lemma was used to argue that the curve β(α ) for the likeli-
hood ratio dominates all other curves. Since the likelihood ratio is used to deﬁn e f -divergences, it
is natural to ask whether the area under the maximal ROC curve is an f -divergence. Interestingly,
the answer is “no”.
Proposition 19 There is no convex f such that I f (P,Q) = AUC(dP/dQ) for all distributions P and
Q.
Proof Note that an f -divergence’s integral can be decomposed as follows
I f (P,Q) =
∫ ∞
0
f (t)
∫
Xt
dQdt, (40)
where Xt := {x ∈ X : dP/dP(x) = t} = (dP/dQ)−1(t). Compare this to the deﬁnition of AUC (τ)
given in (39) when τ = dP/dQ
AUC(dP/dQ) =
∫ ∞
−∞
TPτ(t)FP′
τ(t)dt
= −
∫ ∞
0
(P ◦ τ−1)([t,∞ ))
∫
Xt
dQdt (41)
since FP ′
τ(t) = d/dt
∫ ∞
t
∫
Xt dQ(x)dt = −
∫
Xt dQ and dP/dQ ≥ 0. If we assume there exists an f
such that for all binary experiments (P,Q), I f (P,Q) = AUC(dP/dQ) we would require the integrals
in (40) and (41) to be equal for all (P,Q). This would require f (t) = −(P ◦ (dP/dQ)−1)([t,∞ )) for
762

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
all t ∈ [0,∞ ) which is not possible for all binary experiments (P,Q) simultaneously.
Although the maximal AUC for(P,Q) cannot be expressed as anf -divergence, Torgersen (1991)
shows how it can be expressed as the variational divergence between the product measures P × Q
and Q×P. That is, AUC(dP/dQ) =V (P×Q,Q×P). Following up this connection and considering
other f -divergences of product measures is left as future work.
It is important to realise that AUC is not a particularly intrinsic measure—just a c ommon
one. As the earlier discussion of integral representations has shown, th ere is value in consider-
ing weighted versions of integrals such as (38). As Hand (2008) notes in his commentary on a
recent paper (outlining another type of performance curve): “To use all the values of the diagnos-
tic instrument, when integrating to yield the overall AUC measure, it is necessar y to decide what
weight to give to each value in the integration. The AUC implicitly does this using a w eighting
derived empirically from the data.” Along these lines, Xie and Priebe (2002) and Eguchi and Copas
(2001) have suggested generalisations of the AUC that incorporates we ights and show that certain
choice of weight functions yield well-known losses.
A closer investigation of these generalisations of AUC and their connection to measures of
divergence is also left as future work.
6.2 Risk Curves
Risk curves are a graphical representation closely related to ROC curve s that take into account a
prior π in addition to the binary experiment (P,Q). They provide a concise summary of the risk of
an estimator ˆη for the full range of costs c ∈ [0,1] for a ﬁxed prior π ∈ [0,1], or, alternatively, for
the full range of priors π given a ﬁxed cost c.
A risk curve for costs for the estimator ˆη is the set {(c, Lc( ˆη,π,P,Q)) : c ∈ [0,1]} of points
parameterised by cost.20 A risk curve for priors for the estimator ˆη is the set {(π, L0-1( ˆη,π,P,Q)) :
π ∈ [0,1]}.
Figure 4 shows an example of a risk curve diagram . On it is plotted the cost curves for an
estimate ˆη of a true posterior η on the same graph. The “tent” function also shown is the risk curve
for the majority class predictor min {(1 − π)c, (1 − c)π}. Here π = 1
2. Other choices of π ∈ (0,1)
skew the tent and the curves under it towards 0 or 1.
In light of the weighted integral representations described in Theorem 16, several of the quanti-
ties can be associated with properties of a cost curve diagram. The weight function w(c) associated
with a lossℓ can be interpreted as a weighting on the horizontal axis of a risk curve diagram. When
the area under a risk curve is computed with respect to this weighting the resu lt is the full risk L
since L(η, ˆη ) =
∫ 1
0 Lc(η, ˆη )w(c)dc.
Furthermore, the weighted area between the risk curves for an estimate ˆη and the true posterior
η is the regret L(η, ˆη ) − L(η ) and the statistical information Δ L(η,M) = L(π,M) − L(η,M) is the
weighted area between the “tent” risk curve forπ and the risk curve for η.
The correspondence between ROC and risks curves is due to the relation ship between the true
class probability η and the likelihood ratio dP/dQ for a ﬁxed π. As shown in Section 4.1, this
20. Unlike the cost curves originally described by Drummond and Holte (2 006), the version presented here does not
normalise the risk, and plots the cost on the horizontal axis rather than the product of the prior probability and cost.
763

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Lc
c
10
/.notdef.g0002
/.notdef.g0001
Lc (η)
Lc (η, ˆη)
Figure 4: Example of a risk curve for costs diagram showing risk curves for costs for the true
posterior probability η (bottom, solid curve), an estimate ˆη (middle, bold curve) and the
majority class or prior estimate (top, dashed curve).
relationship is
dP
dQ = λπ(η ) = 1 − π
π
η
1 − η.
Each cost c ∈ [0,1] can be mapped to a corresponding test statistic threshold τ0 = λπ(c) and vice
versa.
Drummond and Holte (2006) show that their cost curves have a point-line dual relationship with
ROC curves. As can be established with some straight-forward algebra, th e same result holds for
our risk diagrams.
Proposition 20 For a given point (FP,TP) on an ROC diagram the corresponding line in a risk
diagram is
Lc = (1 − π)cFP + π (1 − c) (1 − TP), c ∈ [0,1]
Conversely, the line in ROC space corresponding to a point(c, Lc) in risk space is
TP = (1 − π)c
π(1 − c)FP + (1 − π)c − Lc
π(1 − c) , FP ∈ [0,1].
An example of this relationship is shown graphically21 in Figure 5 between the point A and the
line A*.
21. An applet that demonstrates the relationship can be found at http://mark.reid.name/iem/
visualising-roc-and-cost-curve-duality.html .
764

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
L c
c
10
/gid2
/gid1 10
1
False Positive Rate 
True Positive Rate 
A
A* 
Figure 5: Cost curve diagram (left) and corresponding ROC diagram ( right). The black curves on
the left and right represent risk and classiﬁcation rates of an example predictor. The grey
Bayes risk curve on the left corresponds to the dominating grey ROC curv e on the right
for the likelihood statistic. Similarly, the dashed tent on the left corresponds tothe dashed
diagonal ROC line on the right. The point labelled A in the risk diagram corres ponds to
the line labelled A* in the ROC diagram.
6.3 Transforming from ROC to Risk Curves and Back
As mentioned earlier, the Neyman-Pearson lemma guarantees the ROC curve f or η is maximal.
This corresponds to the cost curve being minimal. In fact, these relationship s are dual in the sense
that there exists a transformation from one to the other as we shall now show . We make use of
a connection between the Neyman-Pearson function in (11) and the maximal R OC curve due to
Torgersen (1981). For completeness, a proof using our nomenclaturecan be found in Appendix A.7.
Theorem 21 Let β(α,P,Q) be the Neyman-Pearson function for the binary experiment (P,Q) and
let L
(π,P,Q) be the 0-1 Bayes risk on the same experiment for the prior π. Then, for any choice of
π ∈ [0,1] we have
L(π,P,Q) = L = min
α ∈[0,1]
((1 − π)α + π(1 − β(α,P,Q)) (42)
and conversely for any α ∈ [0,1],
β(α,P,Q) = inf
π∈(0,1]
1
π ((1 − π)α + π − L(π,P,Q)). (43)
π ↦→L(π,P,Q) is the lower envelope of a parameterized (by π) family of afﬁne functions (in α )
and is thus concave. When β(·) and L(·) are smooth, explicit closed form formulas can be found:
765

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Theorem 22 Suppose β and L are differentiable on (0,1] and [0,1] respectively. Then
L(π) = (1 − π)ˇβ(π) +π(1 − β(ˇβ(π))), π ∈ [0,1], (44)
where
ˇβ(π) := β′−1
(1 − π
π
)
and
β(α ) = 1
ˇL(α )
[
(1 − ˇL(α ))α + ˇL(α ) − L( ˇL(α ))
]
, α ∈ (0,1], (45)
where
ˇL(α ) := ˜L
−1
(α ) ∧ 1,
˜L(π) := L(π) − πL′(π).
The proof can be found in Appendix A.6.
Using (45) we present an example. Consider L(π) = γπ(1 − π) for γ ∈ [0,1] One can readily
check that ˜L(γ)(π) = γπ2. Hence ˜L
−1
(γ) (α ) =
√
α
γ ∈
[
0, 1
γ
]
. Thus ˇL(γ)(α ) = 0 ∨ ˜L
−1
(γ) (α ) ∧1 =
√
α/γ∧
1. Substituting and rearranging we ﬁnd that the corresponding β is given by
βγ(α ) = α + γ+ (
√
α/γ∧ 1)(1 − α − γ)√
α/γ∧ 1
.
A graph of this β(·) is given in ﬁgure 6.
By construction β(1) = 1 and β is concave and continuous on(0,1]. The following lemma is due
to Torgersen (1991). Given mild conditions on the space of instances, this gives a corollary which
guarantees that all concave curves on a risk diagram can be realised b y some pair of distributions.
Their proofs can be found in Appendix A.8 and Appendix A.9, respectively.
Lemma 23 Suppose X contains a connected component C. Let φ : [0,1] → [0,1] be an arbitrary
function that is concave and continuous on (0,1] such that φ(1) = 1. Then there exists distributions
P and Q on X such that β(α,P,Q) = φ(α ) for all α ∈ [0,1].
Corollary 24 Suppose X contains a connected component. Let ψ : [0,1] → [0,1] be an arbitrary
concave function such that for all π ∈ [0,1], 0 ≤ ψ (π) ≤ π ∧ (1 − π). Then there exists distributions
P and Q on X such that L(π,P,Q) = ψ (π) for all π ∈ [0,1].
The corollary shows that reasoning about cost-weighted risks for all possible binary experiments
(P,Q) can be done purely geometrically. Each experiment can be associated with a concave curve
and vice versa so that the existence of an experiment becomes equivalent to the existence of a
concave curve with certain properties. This relationship is exploited in the next section to establish
bounds for f -divergences in Theorem 30.
766

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
0.2
0.6
alpha
1
0.8
0.6
0
1
0.2 0.8
0.4
0.4
Figure 6: Graph of the parameterised Neyman-Pearson function α ↦→βγ(α,P,Q) for γ = i/20, i =
1,..., 20. (See text.)
7. Bounding General Objects in Terms of Primitives
All of the above results are exact—they are exact representations of pa rticular primitives or general
objects in terms of other primitives. Another type of relationship is an inequality. In this section we
consider how we can (tightly) bound the value of a general object ( I f or Bw) in terms of primitive
objects (Vπ—the generalised variational divergence deﬁned below—or Bc, the regret with respect to
the cost weight loss (29)). Bounding I f (P,Q) in terms of Vπ(P,Q) is a generalisation of the classical
Pinsker inequality (Pinsker, 1964). Bounding Bw(η, ˆη ) in terms of Bc(η, ˆη ) is a generalisation of
the so-called “surrogate regret bounds” (Zhang, 2004b; Bartlett etal., 2006).
As explained previously, we work with the conditional Bregman divergence Bw(η, ˆη ). Results
in terms of Bw(η, ˆη ), η, ˆη ∈ [0,1] immediately imply results for Bw(η, ˆη ), where η, ˆη ∈ [0,1]X by
taking expectations with respect to X.
7.1 Surrogate Regret Bounds
Suppose for some ﬁxed c0 ∈ (0,1) that Bc0(η, ˆη ) = α . What can be said concerning the value
of Bw(η, ˆη ) for an arbitrary weight function w? Surrogate regret bounds answer this question by
showing how the value of Bc0 is controlled by a function of Bw. That is, Bc0 ≤ F(Bw) for some
non-decreasing F. The main result of this subsection, Theorem 25, presents a general su rrogate
767

REID AND WILLIAMSON
bound for proper losses implicitly as Bw ≥ F −1(Bc0). However, as Corollary 28 shows, this implicit
bound can always be inverted.
Previous work on this problem is summarised in Appendix D. Apart from their theoretical
interest, these bounds have direct practical implications: it can often be muc h simpler to minimise
Bw(η, ˆη ) over ˆη than to minimise Bc(η, ˆη ). The bounds below will tell the user of such a scheme
the maximum price they will have to pay, in terms of statistical performance, for us ing a particular
surrogate.
Theorem 25 Let c 0 ∈ (0,1) and let B c0(η, ˆη ) denote the point-wise regret for the cost-weighted
lossℓc0. Suppose it is known that B c0(η, ˆη ) = α . Then the point-wise regret B(η, ˆη ) for any proper
surrogate lossℓ with point-wise risk L and Bayes risk L
satisﬁes
B(η, ˆη ) ≥ ψ (c0,α ) ∨ ψ (c0, −α ), (46)
where
ψ (c0,α ) := B(c0,c0 + α ) = L(c0) − L(c0 + α ) +α L′(c0).
Furthermore (46) is tight.
The proof of this bound is almost a direct consequence of the fact that r egrets for proper losses
are Bregman divergences (see Section 4.4). This is a simpliﬁed version of an earlier proof by Reid
and Williamson (2009). We will make use of the following expression for Bc derived by Buja et al.
(2005). Its proof can be found in Appendix A.10.
Lemma 26 Suppose Lc is the conditional risk for cost-sensitive misclassiﬁcation loss (see 5.2). For
any loss c ∈ [0,1] the cost-weighted regret Bc(η, ˆη ) := Lc(η, ˆη ) − L
c(η ) satisﬁes
Bc(η, ˆη ) = |η − c|/llbracketη ∧ ˆη< c ≤ η ∨ ˆη /rrbracket.
Proof (Theorem 25) Let B be the conditional regret associated with some arbitrary proper loss
ℓ and suppose that we know the cost-weighted regret Bc0(η, ˆη ) = α . By Lemma 26, this implies
that α = η − c0 when ˆη ≤ c0< η and α = c0 + η when η ≤ c0< ˆη. Since B(η, ˆη ) is a Bregman
divergence its value decreases as |η − ˆη | decreases (see Section 2.5). Thus, in the ﬁrst case we have
ˆη ≤ c0< c0 + α = η and so B(η, ˆη ) = B(c0 + α, ˆη ) ≥ B(c0 + α,c0) and is minimised when ˆη = c0.
The proof of the second case, when η = c0 − α ≤ c0< ˆη proceeds identically. Thus, B(η, ˆη ) is
no smaller than each of B(c0 + α,c0) and B(c0 − α,c0), giving the required result.
By restricting attention to the case when c0 = 1
2 and symmetric losses we obtain, as a corollary,
a result similar to that presented by Bartlett et al. (2006) for surrogate mar gin losses since B 1
2
is
easily shown to be half the 0-1 regret. It is obtained by substituting α = 1
2 and noting the symmetry
of L implies L′( 1
2 ) = 0; Appendix D contains some examples illustrating this special case.
Corollary 27 If L is symmetric—that is, L ( 1
2 −c) = L( 1
2 +c) for c ∈ [0, 1
2 ]—and B 1
2
(η, ˆη ) = α , then
B(η, ˆη ) ≥ L( 1
2 ) − L( 1
2 + α ).
The bounds in Theorem 25 can be inverted to allow the approximate minimisation of a cost-
weighted loss via the minimisation of a surrogate loss.
768

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Corollary 28 Minimising B(η, ˆη ) w.r.t. ˆη minimises the bound on Bc(η, ˆη ) for each c ∈ (0,1).
Proof To see this, let ψ ′(c0,α ) := ∂
∂α ψ (c0,α ) = −L′(c0 + α ) + L′(c0). Since L is concave, L′ is
non-increasing and hence L′(c0 + α ) ≤ L′(c0) and so ψ ′(c0,α ) ≥ 0 and therefore α ↦→ψ (c0,α ) is
non-decreasing and thus invertible (although there may be non-uniqueness at points where ψ (c0,α )
is constant in α ). This invertibility means minimising B(η, ˆη ) w.r.t. ˆη, minimises the bound on
Bc(η, ˆη ).
Finally, Theorem 25 can be used to immediately establish a loose, second-order bound in α for
symmetric losses in terms of their weight function, similar to a result due to Buja et al. (2005).
Corollary 29 Suppose Bw is the regret for a symmetric proper lossℓ with associated weight function
w. Then
Bw(η, ˆη ) ≥ w( 1
2 )
2
[
B 1
2
(η, ˆη )
] 2
.
Proof A Taylor series expansion of the second term in the bound of Corollary 27about α = 1
2 gives
Bw(η, ˆη ) ≥ w( 1
2 )
2 α 2 + w′′( 1
2 )
24 α 4 + · · ·
since the linear term cancels and there is no third order term sincew is symmetric and thusw′( 1
2 ) = 0.
Setting α = B 1
2
(η, ˆη ) gives the result.
Some extensions to the above result have been recently presented by Scott (2010).
7.2 General Pinsker Inequalities for Divergences
The many different f divergences are single number summaries of the relationship between two
distributions P and Q. Each f -divergence emphasises different aspects. Merely considering the
functions f by which f -divergences are traditionally deﬁned makes it hard to understand these
different aspects, and harder still to understand how knowledge ofI f1 constrains the possible values
of I f2. When I f1 = V (a special primitive for I f ) and I f2 = KL, this is a classical problem that has
been studied for decades; Appendix E summarises the history.
Vajda (1970) posed the question of atight lower bound on KL-divergence in terms of variational
divergence. This “best possible Pinsker inequality” takes the form
L(V ) := inf
V (P,Q)=V
KL(P,Q), V ∈ [0,2), (47)
where the inﬁmum is over all P and Q such that V (P,Q) = V . Recently Fedotov et al. (2003)
presented an implicit (parametric) version of the form
(V (t),L(t))t∈R+, (48)
V (t) = t
(
1 −
(
coth(t) − 1
t
)2)
, L(t) = ln
( t
sinh(t)
)
+t coth(t) − t2
sinh2(t).
769

REID AND WILLIAMSON
We will now show how viewingf -divergences in terms of their weighted integral representation
simpliﬁes the problem of understanding the relationship between different d ivergences and leads,
amongst other things, to an explicit formula for (47).
We make use of a generalised notion of variational divergence:
Vπ(P,Q) := 2 sup
r∈[−1,1]X
|πEPr − (1 − π)EQr|, (49)
where π ∈ (0,1) and the supremum is over all measurable functions from X to [−1,1].
Fix a positive integern. Consider a sequence 0< π1< π2< · · ·< πn< 1. Suppose we “sampled”
the value of Vπ(P,Q) at these discrete values of π. Since π ↦→Vπ(P,Q) is concave, the piecewise
linear concave function passing through points
{(πi,Vπi(P,Q))}n
i=1
is guaranteed to be an upper bound on the variational curve(π,Vπ(P,Q))π∈(0,1). This therefore gives
a lower bound on the f -divergence given by a weight function γ. This observation forms the basis
of the theorem stated below.
Theorem 30 For a positive integer n consider a sequence0< π1< π2< · · ·< πn< 1. Let π0 := 0
and πn+1 := 1 and for i = 0,..., n + 1 let
ψ i := (1 − πi) ∧ πi −Vπi(P,Q)
(observe that consequently ψ 0 = ψ n+1 = 0). Let
An :=
{
a = (a1,..., an) ∈ Rn : (50)
ψ i+1 − ψ i
πi+1 − πi
≤ ai ≤ ψ i − ψ i−1
πi − πi−1
, i = 1,..., n
}
.
The set An deﬁnes the allowable slopes of a piecewise linear function majorizing π ↦→Vπ(P,Q) and
matching it at each of π1,..., πn. For a = (a1,..., an) ∈ An, let
˜πi := ψ i−ψ i+1+ai+1πi+1−aiπi
ai+1 − ai
, i = 0,..., n, (51)
j := {k ∈ {1,..., n} : ˜πk< 1
2 ≤ ˜πk+1}, (52)
¯πi := /llbracketi< j/rrbracket˜πi + /llbracketi = j/rrbracket1
2 + /llbracketj< i/rrbracket˜πi−1, (53)
α a,i := /llbracketi ≤ j/rrbracket(1 − ai) +/llbracketi> j/rrbracket(−1 − ai−1), (54)
βa,i := /llbracketi ≤ j/rrbracket(ψ i−aiπi)+/llbracketi> j/rrbracket(ψ i−1−ai−1πi−1) (55)
for i = 0,..., n + 1 and let γf be the weight corresponding to f given by (28).
For arbitraryI f and for all distributions P and Q onX the following bound holds. If in addition
X contains a connected component, it is tight.
I f (P,Q) ≥ min
a∈An
n
∑
i=0
∫ ¯πi+1
¯πi
(α a,iπ + βa,i)γf (π)dπ (56)
= min
a∈An
n
∑
i=0
[
(α a,i ¯πi+1 + βa,i)Γ f (¯πi+1) − α a,i ¯Γ f (¯πi+1)
− (α a,i ¯πi + βa,i)Γ f (¯πi) +α a,i ¯Γ f (¯πi)
]
, (57)
770

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
where Γ f (π) :=
∫ π γf (t)dt and ¯Γ f (π) :=
∫ π Γ f (t)dt.
Equation 57 follows from (56) by integration by parts. The remainder of theproof is in Section A.12.
Although (57) looks daunting, we observe: (1) the constraints on a are convex (in fact they are a
box constraint); and (2) the objective is a relatively benign function of a.
When n = 1 the result simpliﬁes considerably. If in addition π1 = 1
2 then V1
2
(P,Q) = 1
4V (P,Q).
It is then a straightforward exercise to explicitly evaluate (56), especially when γf is symmetric. The
following theorem expresses the result in terms of V (P,Q) for comparability with previous results.
The result for KL(P,Q) is a (best-possible) improvement on the classical Pinsker inequality.
Theorem 31 For any distributions P,Q on X, let V := V (P,Q). Then the following bounds hold
and, if in addition X has a connected component, are tight.
When γ is symmetric about 1
2 and convex,
I f (P,Q) ≥ 2
[ ¯Γ f
(1
2 − V
4
)
+ V
4 Γ f
(1
2
)
− ¯Γ f
(1
2
)]
and Γ f and ¯Γ f are as in Theorem 30.
This theorem gives the ﬁrst explicit representation of the optimal Pinsker bound.22
Corollary 32 The following special cases hold (γ symmetric about 1/2).
h2(P,Q) ≥ 2 −
√
4 −V 2,
J(P,Q) ≥ 2V ln
(2+V
2−V
)
,
Ψ (P,Q) ≥ 8V 2
4 −V 2,
I(P,Q) ≥
(1
2 − V
4
)
ln(2 −V ) +
(1
2 + V
4
)
ln(2 +V ) − ln(2),
T(P,Q) ≥ ln
(
4√
4−V 2
)
− ln(2).
The following special cases hold (γ is not symmetric)
χ2(P,Q) ≥ /llbracketV < 1/rrbracketV 2 + /llbracketV ≥ 1/rrbracketV
(2−V ), (58)
KL(P,Q) ≥ min
β∈[V −2,2−V ]
(
V +2−β
4
)
ln
(
β−2−V
β−2+V
)
+
(
β+2−V
4
)
ln
(
β+2−V
β+2+V
)
. (59)
By plotting both (48) and (59) one can conﬁrm that the two bounds (implicit and explicit) coincide;
see Figure 7.
The above theorem suggests a means by which one canestimate an f -divergence by estimating a
sequence (Lci(π,P,Q))n
i=1. A simpler version of such an idea (more directly using the representation
(27)) has been studied by Song et al. (2008).
22. A summary of existing results and their relationship to those presented here is given in Appendix E.
771

REID AND WILLIAMSON
2
1
0
21.510.50
5
4
3
Figure 7: Lower bound on KL (P,Q) as a function of the variational divergence V (P,Q). Both the
explicit bound (59) and Fedotorev et al.’s implicit bound (48) are plotted.
8. Variational Representations
We have already seen a number of connections between the Bayes risk
L
(π,P,Q) = inf
ˆη ∈[0,1]X
EX∼M [ℓ(η (X), ˆη(X))]
and the f -divergence
I f (P,Q) = EQ
[
f
(dP
dQ
)]
. (60)
Comparing these deﬁnitions leads to an obvious and intriguing point: the deﬁnitio n of L involves
an optimisation, whereas that for I f does not. Observe that the normal usage of these quantities
is that one wishes to know not just the real number L(π,P,Q), but also the estimate ˆη : X → [0,1]
that attains the minimal risk. In this section we will explore two views of I f —relating the standard
deﬁnition to a variational one that explains where the optimisation is hidden in (60). We then
explore some simpler relationships when using the linear “loss”. In Appendix F we consider the
variational representation of I f obtained by representing f in terms of the LF dual f⋆. We also
explore some generalisations that naturally arise from this representation a nd relate them to each
other and to the standard f -divergence.
772

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
The easiest place to start, unsurprisingly, is with the variational divergence. Below we derive a
straight-forward extension of the classical result relating L0−1( 1
2,P,Q) to V (P,Q). We then explore
variational representations for general f -divergences.
8.1 Generalised Variational Divergence
Let C ⊆ {−1,1}X denote a collection of measurable binary classiﬁers on X. Consider the (con-
strained23) Bayes risk for 0-1 loss minimised over this set:
L
0−1
C (π,P,Q) = inf
r∈C
E(X,Y)∼P[ℓ0−1(r(X), Y)]. (61)
The variational divergence is so called because it can be written
V (P,Q) = 2 sup
A⊆X
|P(A) − Q(A)|, (62)
where the supremum is over all measurable subsets of X. Since
V (P,Q) = sup
r∈[−1,1]X
|EPr − EQr|,
consider the following generalisation of V :
VR,π(P,Q) := 2 sup
r∈R⊆[−1,1]X
|πEPr − (1 − π)EQr|, (63)
where π ∈ (0,1) and the supremum is over all measurable functions from X to [−1,1]. (If R =
[−1,1]X we just write Vπ(P,Q).) When π = 1
2 this is a scaled version of what M¨uller (1997a,b) calls
an integral probability metric.24
If R is symmetric about zero (r ∈ R ⇒ −r ∈ R), then the absolute value signs in (63) can
be removed. To see this, suppose the supremum was attained at r and that α := πEPr − (1 −
π)EQr< 0. Choose r′ := −r and observe that πEPr′ − (1 − π)EQr′ = −α > 0. Thus VR,π(P,Q) =
2sup r∈R⊆[−1,1]X(πEPr − (1 − π)EQr).
Let sgn R := {sgnr : r ∈ R} and for a,b ∈ R, let aR + b := {ar + b: r ∈ R}.
Theorem 33 Suppose R ⊆ [−1,1]X is symmetric about zero and sgn R ⊆ R. For all π ∈ (0,1) and
all P and Q
L0−1
(sgn R+1)/2(π,P,Q) = 1
2 − 1
4VR,π(P,Q) (64)
and the inﬁmum in (61) corresponds to the supremum in (63).
The proof is in Appendix A.11.
23. Tong and Koller (2000) call this the restricted Bayes risk.
24. Zolotarev (1984) calls this a probability metric with ζ-structure. There are probability metrics that are neither f -
divergences nor integral probability metrics. A large collection is due to Ra chev (1991). A recent survey on rela-
tionships (inequalities and some representations) has been given by Gibb s and Su (2002). The idea of generalising
variational divergence by restricting the set the supremum is taken over is also used by Ben-David et al. (2010).
773

REID AND WILLIAMSON
8.2 The Linear “Loss” and the Generalised Variational Divergence
Theorem 33 shows that computing VR,π involves an optimisation problem equivalent to that arising
in the determination of L
. The argmin in the deﬁnition of L is usually called the hypothesis (or
Bayes optimal hypothesis). Following Borgwardt et al. (2006) we will call the argmax in (63) the
witness.
When R = [−1,1]X and π = 1
2, sgn R ⊆ R and furthermore C = (sgn R + 1)/2 = {0,1}X and so
Theorem 33 reduces to the classical result that L0−1( 1
2,P,Q) = 1
2 − 1
4V (P,Q) (Devroye et al., 1996).
The requirement that sgn R ⊆ R is unattractive. It is necessitated by the use of 0-1 loss. It can
be removed by instead considering the linear loss
ℓlin(r(x),y) := 1 − yr(x), y ∈ {−1,1}.
If r is unrestricted, then there is no guarantee that ℓlin> −∞ and is thus a legitimate loss function.
Below we will always consider r ∈ R such that the linear loss is bounded from below. Observe that
the common hinge loss (Steinwart and Christmann, 2008) is simplyℓhinge( f (x),y) = 0∨ℓlin( f (x),y).
Theorem 34 Assume that R ⊆ [−a,a]X for some a> 0 and is symmetric about zero. Then for all
π ∈ (0,1) and all distributions P and Q on X
Llin
R (π,P,Q) = 1 − 1
2VR,π(P,Q)
and the r that attains Llin
R (π,P,Q) corresponds to the r that obtains the supremum in the deﬁnition
of VR,π(P,Q).
Proof
L
lin
R (π,P,Q) = inf
r∈R
(
πEX∼Pℓlin(r(X), −1) + (1 − π)EX∼Qℓlin(r(X), +1)
)
= inf
r∈R
(πEX∼P(1 + r(X)) + (1 − π)EX∼Q(1 − r(X)))
= inf
r∈R
(π + πEPr + (1 − π) − (1 − π)EQr)
= 1 + inf
r∈R
(πEPr − (1 − π)EQr)
= 1 − sup
r∈R
(πEP(−r) − (1 − π)EQ(−r))
= 1 − sup
r∈R
(πEPr − (1 − π)EQr)
= 1 − 1
2VR,π(P,Q),
where the penultimate step exploits the symmetry of R.
Now suppose that R = BH := {r : ∥r∥H ≤ 1}, the unit ball in H, a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) (Sch¨olkopf and Smola, 2002). Thus for all r ∈ R there exists a feature map φ : X →
H such that r(x) = ⟨r,φ(x)⟩H and ⟨φ(x),φ(y)⟩H = k(x,y), where k is a positive deﬁnite kernel func-
tion. Borgwardt et al. (2006) show that
V 2
BH, 1
2
(P,Q) = 1
4 ∥EPφ − EQφ∥2
H. (65)
774

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Given Assumed Derived
(P,Q) f ↔ γ I f (P,Q)
(π,P,Q) U ↔ w,W,W J(U(η )) = Δ L(π,P,Q)
L(η )
ˆη Lw(η, ˆη ), Bw(η, ˆη )
Table 3: Summary relationships between key objects arising in Binary Experime nts. “Given” in-
dicates the object is given or provided by the world; “Assumed” is something the user of
assumes or imposes in order to create a well deﬁned problem; “Derived” indicates quanti-
ties that are derived from the primitives.
Thus
Llin
R (π,P,Q) = 1 − 1
4 ∥EPφ − EQφ∥H. (66)
Empirical estimators derived from the correspondence between (65) and (66) lead to the ν-Support
Vector Machine and Maximum Mean Discrepancy; see Appendix H. Furthe r generalizations of
variational representations of I f are explored in Appendix F.
9. Conclusions
There are several existing concepts that can be used to quantify the amount of information in a task
and its difﬁculty: Uncertainty, Bregman information, statistical information, Bay es risk and regret,
and f -divergences. Information is a difference in uncertainty; regret is a d ifference in risk. In the
case of supervised binary class probability estimation, we have connected and extended several
existing results in the literature to show how to translate between these perspectives. The represen-
tations allow a precise answer to the question of what are the primitives for binary experiments.
We have derived the integral representations in a simple and uniﬁed manner , and illustrated
the value of the representations. Along the way we have drawn connection s to a diverse set of
concepts related to binary experiments: risk curves, cost curves, ROC curves and the area under
them; variational representations of f -divergences, risks and regrets.
Two key consequences are surrogate regret bounds that are at on ce more general and simpler
than those in the literature, and a generalisation of the classical Pinkser ineq uality providing, inter
alia, an explicit form for the best possible Pinsker inequality relating Kullback- Leibler divergence
and Variational divergence. We have also presented a new derivation of support vector machines
and their relationship to Maximum Mean Discrepancy (integral probability metrics).
The key relationships between the basic objects of study are summarised in Table 3 and Figure 1
in §1.2.
All of the results we have presented demonstrate the fundamental and elementary nature of the
cost-weighted misclassiﬁcation loss, which is becoming increasingly apprecia ted in the Machine
Learning literature (Bach et al., 2006; Beygelzimer et al., 2008). The view point developed in this
paper has also recently been used to better understand the structure of c omposite binary losses
(losses involving a link function)—see Reid and Williamson (2010).
775

REID AND WILLIAMSON
More generally, the present work is small part of a larger structural re search agenda to under-
stand the whole ﬁeld of machine learning in terms of relations between problems. We envisage
these relations being richer and more powerful than the already valuable reductions between learn-
ing problems. Much of the present literature on machine learning is highly solutio n focussed. Of
course one does indeed like to solve problems, and we do not suggest otherwise. But it is hard to
see structure in the panoply of solutions which continue to grow each year. The present paper is a
ﬁrst step to a pluralistic uniﬁcation of a diverse set of machine learning problems. The goal we have
in mind can be explained by analogy. There are several such analogies:
Computational Complexity Within the ﬁeld of NP-completeness (Garey and Johnson, 1979; John-
son, 1982–1992; 2005–2007) lead to a detailed and structured unders tanding of the relation-
ships between many fundamental problems and consequently guides the search for solutions
for new problems.
Functional Analysis Compare Machine Learning problems with mathematical functions. In the
19th century, each function was considered separately. Functional An alysis (Lindstr ¨om,
2008) catalogued them by considering sets of functions and relations (mappings) between
them and subsequently developed many new and powerful tools. The incr easing abstraction
and focus on relations has remained a powerful force in mathematics (Wikipedia, 2007).
Biology A systematic cataloging (taxonomy) resonates with Biology’s Linnean past—and tax-
onomies can indeed lead to standardisation and efﬁciency (Bowker and Sta r, 1999). But
taxonomies alone are inadequate—it seems necessary to understand the re lationships in a
manner analogous to Systems Biology which “is about putting together rather than taking
apart, integration rather than reduction. . . . Successful integration at th e systems level must
be built on successful reduction, but reduction alone is far from sufﬁcient” (Noble, 2006).
Geology Finally, Lyell’sPrinciples of Geology (Lyell, 1830) was a watershed in Geology’s history
(Bowker, 2005); prior work is pre-historical. Lyell’s key insight was to explain the huge di-
versity of geological formations in terms of a relatively simple set of transformations applied
repeatedly.
These analogies encourage our aspiration that by more systematically unde rstanding the rela-
tionships between machine learning problems and how they can betransformed into each other, we
will develop a better organised and more powerful toolkit for solving existing and future problems,
and will make progress along the lines suggested by Hand (1994).
Acknowledgments
This work was motivated in part by discussions with Alekh Agarwal, Arthur G retton, Ulrike von
Luxburg and Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf in 2006. The authors were also aided by helpful conversations
with Suvrit Sra and Bharath Sriperumbudur in T¨ubingen in 2008. Thanks also to Marcus Hutter for
reading an early version of this paper and suggesting some useful changes and to Tim van Erven for
ﬁnding several errors. Thanks also to the editor and reviewers for go ing along with our plan of a
single (large!) integrated paper and their detailed and insightful reviews.
776

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Parts of this work appeared earlier in the International Conference on M achine Learning 2009,
and the Conference on Learning Theory, 2009.
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council and NICTA. NICTA is supported
by the Australian Government through Backing Australia’s Ability.
Appendix A. Proofs
This appendix presents the proofs that were omitted in the main body of the paper.
A.1 Proof of Corollary 3
Integration by parts of tφ′′(t) gives
∫ 1
0 t φ′′(t)dt = φ′(1) − (φ(1) − φ(0)) which can be rearranged to
give
φ′(1) =
∫ 1
0
t φ′′(t)dt + (φ(1) − φ(0)).
Substituting this into the Taylor expansion of φ(s) about 1 yields
φ(s) = φ(1) +φ′(1)(s − 1) +
∫ 1
s
(t − s)φ′′(t)dt
= φ(1) +
[ ∫ 1
0
t φ′′(t)dt + (φ(1) − φ(0))
]
(s − 1) +
∫ 1
0
(t − s)+ φ′′(t)dt
= φ(1) + (φ(1) − φ(0))(s − 1) +
∫ 1
0
t(s − 1)φ′′(t)dt +
∫ 1
0
(t − s)+ φ′′(t)dt
= φ(0) + (φ(1) − φ(0))s −
∫ 1
0
ψ (s,t)φ′′(t)dt,
where ψ (s,t) := min{(1 −t)s, (1 − s)t}. This form of ψ is valid since
−(t(s − 1) + (t − s)+) =
{
−ts +t −t + s, t ≥ s
−ts +t, t< s
=
{
s −ts, t ≥ s
t −ts, t< s
= min{(1 −t)s, (1 − s)t}
as required.
A.2 Proof of Theorem 6
Expanding the deﬁnition of the Jensen gap using the deﬁnition of ψ gives
Jµ[ψ (S)] = Eµ[ψ (S)] − ψ (Eµ[S])
= Eµ[φ(S) +bS + a] − (φ(Eµ[S]) +bEµ[S] +a)
= Eµ[φ(S)] +bEµ[S] +a − φ(Eµ[S]) − bEµ[S] − a
= Jµ[φ(S)]
as required.
777

REID AND WILLIAMSON
A.3 Proof of Theorem 9
Proof Given a task (π,P,Q;ℓ) we need to ﬁrst check that
f π(t) := L
(π) − (πt + 1 − π)L
( πt
πt + 1 − π
)
(67)
is convex and that f π(1) = 0. This latter fact is obtained immediately by substituting t = 1 into
f π(t) yielding L(π) − L(π) = 0. The convexity of f π is guaranteed by Theorem 7, which shows that
L is concave and the fact that the perspective transform of a convex function is always convex (see
Section 2.1). Thus the function
t ↦→I−L(πt,πt + 1 − π) = −(πt + 1 − π)L
( πt
πt + 1 − π
)
is the composition of a convex function and an afﬁne one and therefore convex.
Substituting (67) into the deﬁnition of f -divergence in (13) yields
EQ [ f π(dP/dQ)] = EQ
[
L(π) −
(
π dP
dQ + 1 − π
)
L
( πdP
πdP + (1 − π)dQ
)]
= L(π) −
∫
X
L
(
π dP
dM
)
dM
since dM = πdP + (1 − π)dQ. Recall that η = πdP/dM. Since L(π) is constant we note that
L(π) = EM [L(π)] = L(π,M) and so
EQ [ f π(dP/dQ)] = L(π) − EM [L(η )]
= L(π,M) − L(η,M)
= Δ L(η,M)
as required for the forward direction.
Starting with
Lπ(η ) := −1 − η
1 − π f
(1 − π
π
η
1 − η
)
and substituting into the deﬁnition of statistical information in (20) gives us
Δ Lπ(η,M) = EM [Lπ(π)] − EM [Lπ(η )]
=
∫
X
−1 − π
1 − π f (1)dM −
∫
X
−1 − η
1 − π f
(1 − π
π
η
1 − η
)
dM
= 0 +
∫
X
f
(dP
dQ
)
dQ
since f (1) = 0, dQ = (1 − η )/(1 − π)dM and
dP/dQ = 1 − π
π
η
1 − η
by the discussion in Section 4.1. This proves the converse statement of the theorem.
778

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
A.4 Proof of Corollary 13
Proof Let f ♦(t) := t f (1/t) denote the Csisz ´ar-dual of f as described in Section 2.1 above. It is
known (see (16) and, for example, Liese and Vajda, 2006) that
I f (P,Q) = I f ♦(Q,P) if and only if f (t) = f ♦(t) +c1t + c2
for some c1,c2 ∈ R. Since f and γ are related by f ′′(1−π
π
)
= π3γ(π) we can argue as follows. Ob-
serve that f ♦′
(t) = f (1/t)− f ′(1/t)/t and f ♦′′
(t) = f ′′(1/t)/t3. Hence f ♦′′(1−π
π
)
= f ′′( π
1−π
)(π
1−π
)3.
Let π′ = 1 − π. Thus 1−π
π = π′
1−π′ . Hence
f ♦′′
(1 − π
π
)
= f ′′
(1 − π′
π′
)( π
1 − π
)3
= π′3γ(π′)
( π
1 − π
)3
= π3γ(1 − π).
Thus if γ(1 −π) = γ(π), we have shownπ ↦→γ(1 −π) is the weight corresponding to f ♦. Observing
that ∂2
∂t2 ( f ♦(t) +c1t + c2) = f ♦′′
concludes the proof.
A.5 Proof of Theorem 18
Proof Theorem 9 shows that
L
π(η ) = −1 − η
1 − π f
(1 − π
π
η
1 − η
)
. (68)
and we have seen from (32) that wπ(c) = −(Lπ)′′(c). The remainder of this proof involves taking
the second derivative of L, doing some messy algebra and matching the result to the relationship
between γ and f ′′ in (Equation 28).
Letting rπ = rπ(η ) = 1−π
π
η
1−η and taking derivatives of (68) yields
−(Lπ)′(η ) = ( 1 − π)−1[− f (rπ) + (1 − η ) f ′(rπ)r′
π]
−(Lπ)′′(η ) = ( 1 − π)−1[− f ′(rπ)r′
π + (1 − η )( f ′(rπ)r′′
π + f ′′(rπ)(r′
π)2) − f ′(rπ)r′
π]
= ( 1 − π)−1[(−2r′
π + (1 − η )r′′
π ) f ′(rπ) + (1 − η )(r′′
π )2 f ′′(rπ)].
However, the form of rπ means r′
π = 1−π
π
1
(1−η )2 and so r′′
π = 1−π
π
2
(1−η )3 . This means the coefﬁcient
of f ′(rπ) in the above expression vanishes
(−2r′
π + (1 − η )r′′
π ) = 1 − π
π
[ −2
(1 − η )2 + (1 − η ) 2
(1 − η )3
]
= 0.
Substituting this back into −(L)′′ gives us
−(Lπ)′′(η ) = 1 − η
1 − π f ′′(rπ)(r′
π)2
= 1 − η
1 − π f ′′
(1 − π
π
η
1 − η
) (1 − π)2
π2
1
(1 − η )4
w(η ) = 1 − π
π2(1 − η )3 f ′′
(1 − π
π
η
1 − η
)
.
779

REID AND WILLIAMSON
By Equation 28 we have
γ(t) = 1
t3 f ′′
(1 −t
t
)
.
Letting t = (1−c)π
(1−c)π+(1−π)c in that expression gives
γ
((1 − c)π
ν(π,c)
)
= ν(π,c)3
(1 − c)3π3 f ′′
(1 − π
π
c
1 − c
)
.
Thus
π(1 − π)
ν(π,c)3 γ
((1 − c)π
ν(π,c)
)
= 1 − π
π2(1 − c)3 f ′′
(1 − π
π
c
1 − c
)
= w(c)
as required. The argument to show the inverse relationship is essentially the same.
A.6 Proof of Theorem 22
Proof Consider the right side of (42) and differentiate with respect to α :
∂
∂α (1 − π)α + π(1 − β(α )) = (1 − π) − πβ ′(α ).
Setting this to zero we have (1 − π) = πβ ′(α ) and thus β′(α ) = 1−π
π . Since β is monotonically
increasing and concave, β′ is monotonically decreasing and non-negative. Thus we can set
α = β′−1
(1 − π
π
)
∈ [0,1].
Substituting back into (1 − π)α + π(1 − β(α )) we obtain (44).
Now consider the right side of (43):
1
π ((1 − π)α + π − L(π)). (69)
Differentiating with respect to π we have −α
π − L′(π)
π + L(π)
π2 . Setting this equal to zero we obtain
−α
π − L′(π)
π + L(π)
π2 = 0, π ∈ (0,1]
⇒ α + πL′(π) − L(π) = 0.
Observing the deﬁnition of ˜L we thus have that ˜L(π) = α . Now
˜L
′
(π) = ∂
∂π (−πL′(π) +L(π))
= −πL′′(π) − L′(π) +L′(π)
= −πL′′(π)
≥ 0
since L is concave. Thus ˜L(·) is monotonically non-decreasing and we can write π = ˜L
−1
(α ). In
order to ensure π ∈ [0,1] we substitute π = ˇL(α ) into (69) to obtain (45).
780

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
A.7 Proof of Theorem 21
Proof Since the true positive rate for r ∈ {−1,1}X is TPr = P(r−1(1)) and the false positive rate
for r is FPr = Q(r−1(1)) we have
β(α,P,Q) = sup
r∈{−1,1}X
{P(X+
r ) : Q(X+
r ) ≤ α },
where X+
r := r−1(1).
Noting that the 0-1 loss of r is simply its probability of error—that is, the average of the false
positive and false negative rates—we have for each π ∈ [0,1] that the Bayes optimal 0-1 loss is
L
(π,P,Q) = inf
r∈{−1,1}X
{(1 − π)Q(X+
r ) +π(1 − P(X+
r ))},
since the false negative rate FN r = P(X \ X+
r ) = 1 − P(X+
r ). Thus for all π,α ∈ [0,1], and all
measurable functions r : X → {−1,1},
L
(π,P,Q) ≤ (1 − π)Q(X+
r ) +π(1 − P(X+
r ))
≤ (1 − π)α + π(1 − P(X+
r ))
≤ (1 − π)α + π(1 − β(α,P,Q)).
Thus, we see that L
(π,P,Q) is the largest number L such that (1 − π)α + π(1 − β(α )) ≥ L for all
α ∈ [0,1] and hence one can set
L(π,P,Q) = L = min
α ∈[0,1]
((1 − π)α + π(1 − β(α ))
for each π ∈ [0,1].
Conversely, we can express the Neyman-Pearson functionβ in terms of the Bayes risk. That is,
for any α ∈ [0,1], β(α,P,Q) is the largest number β such that
∀π ∈ [0,1] ( 1 − π)α + π(1 − β) ≥ L(π)
⇔ ∀ π ∈ [0,1] ( 1 − π)α − L(π) ≥ π(β − 1)
⇒ ∀ π ∈ (0,1] 1
π ((1 − π)α − L(π)) ≥ β − 1
⇔ ∀ π ∈ (0,1] β ≤ 1
π ((1 − π)α + π − L(π)).
Thus we can set
β(α ) = inf
π∈(0,1]
1
π ((1 − π)α + π − L(π)), α ∈ [0,1].
781

REID AND WILLIAMSON
A.8 Proof of Lemma 23
Proof Let X′ = [0,1] and P be the uniform distribution on X′. Overload P and Q to also denote the
respective cumulative distribution functions (i.e., P(x) = P([0,x])). Thus P(π) = π). Set Q(π) =
φ(π). Since φ(·) is increasing it sufﬁces to consider r(·) of the form rπ(x) = /llbracketx< π/rrbracket. Hence
β(α ) = max{φ(π): 0 ≤ π ≤ 1, π ≤ α }, α ∈ [0,1].
The maximum will always be obtained for π = α and thus β(α ) = φ(α ) for α ∈ [0,1]. Finally, a
pair of distributions on X can be constructed by embedding the connected component C ⊂ X into
X′. Choose g: C → X′ such that g is invertible. Such a g always exists since C is connected. Then
g−1 induces distributions P′ and Q′ on C and thus on X by subsethood.
A.9 Proof of Corollary 24
Proof Choose a ψ satisfying the conditions and substitute into (43). This gives a correspond ing
φ(·). We know from the preceding lemma that there exist P and Q such that β(·,P,Q) = φ(·) which
corresponds to L
(·,P,Q). Thus it remains to show that the function φ deﬁned by
φ(α ) = inf
π∈(0,1]
1
π ((1 − π)α + π − ψ (π))
is concave and satisﬁes φ(1) = 1. Observe that β(1) = infπ∈(0,1]
1−ψ (π)
π . Now by the upper bound on
ψ , we have 1−ψ (π)
π ≥ 1−1+π
π = 1
π ≥ 1. But limπ→1
1−ψ (π)
π = 1 and thus β(1) = 1. Finally note that
β(α ) = inf
π∈(0,1]
(1 − π
π
)
α + (1 − ψ (π)).
This is the lower envelope of a parameterized (by π) family of afﬁne functions (in α ) and is thus
concave.
A.10 Proof of Lemma 26
Proof From Theorem 14 we know that L
c(η ) = min {(1 − η )c, (1 − c)η } and note that (1 − η )c ≤
(1 − c)η ⇐ ⇒c ≤ η. Then, by the deﬁnition of Lc and the identity 1 − /llbracketp/rrbracket= /llbracket¬p/rrbracketwe have
Bc(η, ˆη ) = ( 1 − η )c/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket+ (1 − c)η /llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket− min {(1 − η )c, (1 − c)η }
= ( 1 − η )c/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket+ (1 − c)η /llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket− (1 − η )c/llbracketη ≥ c/rrbracket− (1 − c)η /llbracketη< c/rrbracket
= ( 1 − η )c(/llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket− /llbracketη ≥ c/rrbracket) + (1 − c)η (/llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket− /llbracketη< c/rrbracket).
Note that /llbracketˆη ≥ c/rrbracket− /llbracketη ≥ c/rrbracketis either 1 or -1 depending on whether ˆη ≥ c> η or ˆη < c ≤ η and is
zero otherwise. Similarly, /llbracketˆη< c/rrbracket− /llbracketη< c/rrbracketis 1 when ˆη< c ≤ η, is -1 when ˆη ≥ c> η and is zero
782

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
otherwise. This means
Bc(η, ˆη ) =
{
(1 − η )c − (1 − c)η, ˆη ≥ c> η
−(1 − η )c + (1 − c)η, η ≥ c> ˆη
=
{
c − η, ˆη ≥ c> η
η − c, η ≥ c> ˆη
= |η − c|/llbracketmin{η, ˆη } ≤ c< max{η, ˆη }/rrbracket
as required.
A.11 Proof of Theorem 33
Proof Let C := (sgn R + 1)/2 ⊆ {0,1}X and so sgn R = 2C − 1. Then
L
0−1
C (π,P,Q) = inf
r∈C
E(X,Y)∼Pℓ0−1(r(X), Y)
= inf
r∈C
(
πEX∼Pℓ0−1(r(X),0) + (1 − π)EX∼Qℓ0−1(r(X),1)
)
= inf
r∈C
(πEX∼P/llbracketr(X) = 1/rrbracket+ (1 − π)EX∼Q/llbracketr(X) = 0/rrbracket)
= inf
r∈C
(πEPr + (1 − π)EQ(1 − r))
since Ranr = {0,1} ⇒ EX∼P/llbracketr(X) = 1/rrbracket= EX∼Pr(X) and EX∼Q/llbracketr(X) = 0/rrbracket= EX∼Q(1 − r(X)). Let
ρ = 2r − 1 ∈ 2C − 1. Thus r = ρ+1
2 . Hence
L0−1
C (π,P,Q) = inf
ρ∈2C−1
(
πEP
(ρ + 1
2
)
− (1 − π)EQ
(
1 − ρ + 1
2
))
= 1
2 inf
ρ∈2C−1
(πEP(ρ + 1) + (1 − π)EQ(1 − ρ))
= 1
2 inf
ρ∈2C−1
(πEPρ + (1 − π)EQ(−ρ) +π + (1 − π))
= 1
2 + 1
2 inf
ρ∈2C−1
(πEPρ − (1 − π)EQρ)
= 1
2 − 1
2 sup
ρ∈2C−1
(πEP(−ρ) − (1 − π)EQ(−ρ)).
Since R is symmetric about zero, sgn (R) = 2C − 1, C ⊆ {0,1}X is symmetric about 1
2; that is,
ρ ∈ C ⇒ (1 − ρ) ∈ C. Thus
L0−1
C (π,P,Q) = 1
2 − 1
2 sup
ρ∈2C−1
(πEPρ − (1 − π)EQρ)
= 1
2 − 1
4V2C−1,π(P,Q)
= 1
2 − 1
4Vsgn R,π(P,Q). (70)
783

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Since by assumption sgn R ⊆ R, the supremum in (63) will be ±1-valued everywhere. Thus
Vsgn R,π(P,Q) = VR,π(P,Q). Combining this fact with (70) leads to (64).
Finally observe that by replacing inf and sup by argmin and argmax the ﬁnalpart of the theorem
is apparent.
A.12 Pinsker Theorems
Proof (Theorem 30) Given a binary experiment (P,Q) denote the corresponding statistical infor-
mation as
φ(π) = φ(P,Q)(π) := Δ L
0−1(π,P,Q) = π ∧ (1 − π) − ψ (P,Q)(π),
where ψ (P,Q)(π) = ψ (π) = L0−1(π,P,Q). We know that ψ is non-negative and concave and satisﬁes
ψ (π) ≤ π ∧ (1 − π) and thus ψ (0) = ψ (1) = 0.
Since
I f (P,Q) =
∫ 1
0
φ(π)γf (π)dπ, (71)
I f (P,Q) is minimized by minimizing φ(P,Q) over all (P,Q) such that
φ(πi) = φi = πi ∧ (1 − πi) − ψ (P,Q)(πi).
Let ψ i := ψ (πi) = 1
2 − 1
4Vπi(P,Q). The problem becomes:
Given (πi,ψ i)n
i=1 ﬁnd the maximal ψ : [0,1] → [0, 1
2 ] such that (72)
ψ (πi) = ψ i, i = 0,..., n + 1, (73)
ψ (π) ≤ π ∧ (1 − π), π ∈ [0,1], (74)
ψ is concave. (75)
This will tell us the optimal φ to use since optimising over ψ is equivalent to optimizing over
L(·,P,Q). Under the additional assumption on X, Corollary 24 implies that for any ψ satisfying
(73), (74) and (75) there exists P,Q such that L(·,P,Q) = ψ (·).
Let Ψ be the set of piecewise linear concave functions on [0,1] having n + 1 segments such that
ψ ∈ Ψ ⇒ ψ satisﬁes (73) and (74). We now show that in order to solve (72) it sufﬁc es to consider
ψ ∈ Ψ .
If g is a concave function on R, then
ðg(x) := {s ∈ R: g(y) ≤ g(x) +⟨s,y − x⟩, y ∈ R}
denote the sup-differential of g at x. (This is the obvious analogue of the sub-differential for convex
functions Rockafellar, 1970.) Suppose ˜ψ is a general concave function satisfying (73) and (74). For
i = 1,..., n, let
G ˜ψ
i :=
{
[0,1] ∋ g ˜ψ
i : πi ↦→ψ i ∈ R is linear and ∂
∂π g ˜ψ
i (π)
⏐
⏐
⏐
π=πi
∈ ð ˜ψ (πi)
}
.
Observe that by concavity, for all concave ˜ψ satisfying (73) and (74), for all g ∈ ⋃ n
i=1 G ˜ψ
i , g(π) ≥
ψ (π), π ∈ [0,1].
784

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
/.notdef.g0002(/.notdef.g0001)/.notdef.g0001/.notdef.g0001(1- /.notdef.g0001)
/.notdef.g0003
1
/.notdef.g0003
2
/.notdef.g0003
3
/.notdef.g0004
2
/.notdef.g0004
3
/.notdef.g0004
1
/.notdef.g00011 /.notdef.g00012 /.notdef.g00013/.notdef.g00010 /.notdef.g00014
0.5 
0
/.notdef.g00010
~ /.notdef.g00011
~ ~
/.notdef.g00012 /.notdef.g00013
~ ~
/.notdef.g00014
Admissible region for 
lines with slopes in A2
/.notdef.g0004a(/.notdef.g0001) for a particular a
Figure 8: Illustration of construction of optimal ψ (π) = L(π,P,Q). The optimal ψ is piecewise
linear such that ψ (πi) = ψ i, i = 0,..., n + 1.
Thus given any such ˜ψ , one can always construct
ψ ∗(π) = min(g ˜ψ
1 (π),..., g ˜ψ
n (π)) (76)
such that ψ ∗ is concave, satisﬁes (73) andψ ∗(π) ≥ ˜ψ (π), for all π ∈ [0,1]. It remains to take account
of (74). That is trivially done by setting
ψ (π) = min(ψ ∗(π),π ∧ (1 − π)) (77)
which remains concave and piecewise linear (although with potentially one add itional linear seg-
ment). Finally, the pointwise smallest concave ψ satisfying (73) and (74) is the piecewise linear
function connecting the points (0,0), (π1,ψ 1), (π2,ψ 2),..., (πm,ψ m), (1,0).
Let g: [0,1] → [0, 1
2 ] be this function which can be written explicitly as
g(π) =
(
ψ i + (ψ i+1 − ψ )(π − πi)
πi+1 − πi
)
·/llbracketπ ∈ [πi,πi+1]/rrbracket, i = 0,..., n,
where we have deﬁned π0 := 0, ψ 0 := 0, πn+1 := 1 and ψ n+1 := 0.
We now explicitly parameterize this family of functions. Let pi : [0,1] → R denote the afﬁne
segment the graph of which passes through (πi,ψ i), i = 0,..., n + 1. Write pi(π) = aiπ + bi. We
know that pi(πi) = ψ i and thus
bi = ψ i − aiπi, i = 0,..., n + 1.
785

REID AND WILLIAMSON
In order to determine the constraints on ai, since g is concave and minorizes ψ , it sufﬁces to only
consider (πi−1,g(πi−1)) and (πi+1,g(πi+1)) for i = 1,..., n. We have (for i = 1,..., n)
pi(πi−1) ≥ g(πi−1)
⇒ aiπi−1 + bi ≥ ψ i−1
⇒ aiπi−1 + ψ i − aiπi ≥ ψ i−1
⇒ ai (πi−1 − πi)  
<0
≥ ψ i−1 − ψ i
⇒ ai ≤ ψ i−1 − ψ i
πi−1 − πi
.
Similarly we have (for i = 1,..., n)
pi(πi+1) ≥ g(πi+1)
⇒ aiπi+1 + bi ≥ ψ i+1
⇒ aiπi+1 + ψ i − aiπi ≥ ψ i+1
⇒ ai (πi+1 − πi)  
>0
≥ ψ i+1 − ψ i
⇒ ai ≥ ψ i+1 − ψ i
πi+1 − πi
.
We now determine the points at which ψ deﬁned by (76) and (77) change slope. That occurs at the
points π when
pi(π) = pi+1(π)
⇒ aiπ + ψ i − aiπi = ai+1π + ψ i+1 − ai+1πi+1
⇒ (ai+1 − ai)π = ψ i − ψ i+1 + ai+1πi+1 − aiπi
⇒ π = ψ i − ψ i+1 + ai+1πi+1
ai+1 − ai
=: ˜πi
for i = 0,..., n. Thus
ψ (π) = pi(π), π ∈ [˜πi−1, ˜πi], i = 1,..., n.
Let a = (a1,..., an). We explicitly denote the dependence of ψ on a by writing ψ a. Let
φa(π) := π ∧ (1 − π) − ψ a(π)
= α a,iπ + βa,i, π ∈ [¯πi−1, ¯πi], i = 1,..., n + 1,
where a ∈ An (see (50)), ¯πi, α a,i and βa,i are deﬁned by (53), (54) and (55) respectively. The extra
segment induced at index j (see (52)) is needed since π ↦→π ∧ (1 − π) has a slope change at π = 1
2.
Thus in general, φa is piecewise linear with n + 2 segments (recall i ranges from 0 to n + 2); if
˜πk+1 = 1
2 for some k ∈ {1,..., n}, then there will be only n + 1 non-trivial segments.
Thus {
π ↦→
n
∑
i=0
φa(π) ·/llbracketπ ∈ [¯πi, ¯πi+1]/rrbracket: a ∈ An
}
786

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
/.notdef.g0003(/.notdef.g0001)/.notdef.g0001 /.notdef.g0002 (1- /.notdef.g0001)
/.notdef.g00011
0.5 
0
/.notdef.g0005 /.notdef.g0001 /.notdef.g0002
/.notdef.g0005
1
1L U
/.notdef.g0004
Figure 9: The optimisation problem when n = 1. Given ψ 1, there are many risk curves consistent
with it. The optimisation problem involves ﬁnding the piecewise linear concave risk curve
ψ ∈ Ψ and the corresponding φ = π ∧ (1 − π) that maximises I f . L and U are deﬁned in
the text.
is the set of φ consistent with the constraints and An is deﬁned in (50). Thus substituting into (71),
interchanging the order of summation and integration and optimizing we have sho wn (56). The
tightness has already been argued: under the additional assumption on X, since there is no slop
in the argument above since every φ satisfying the constraints is the Bayes risk function for some
(P,Q).
Proof (Theorem 31) In this casen = 1 and the optimalψ function will be piecewise linear, concave,
and its graph will pass through (π1,ψ 1). Thus the optimal φ will be of the form
φ(π) =



0, π ∈ [0,L] ∪ [U,1]
π − (aπ + b), π ∈ [L, 1
2 ]
(1 − π) − (aπ + b), π ∈ [ 1
2,U].
where aπ1 +b = ψ 1 ⇒ b = ψ 1 −aπ1 and a ∈ [−2ψ 1,2ψ 1] (see Figure 9). For variational divergence,
π1 = 1
2 and thus
ψ 1 = π1 ∧ (1 − π1) − V
4 = 1
2 − V
4 (78)
787

REID AND WILLIAMSON
and so φ1 = V/4. We can thus determine L and U:
aL + b = L
⇒ aL + ψ 1 − aπ1 = L
⇒ L = aπ1 − ψ 1
a − 1 .
Similarly aU + b = 1 −U ⇒ U = 1−ψ 1+aπ1
a+1 and thus
I f (P,Q) ≥ min
a∈[−2ψ 1,2ψ 1]
1
2∫
aπ1−ψ 1
a−1
[(1 − a)π − ψ 1 + aπ1]γf (π)dπ +
1−ψ 1+aπ1
a+1∫
1
2
[(−a − 1)π − ψ 1 + aπ1 + 1]γf (π)dπ.
(79)
If γf is symmetric about π = 1
2 (so by Corollary 13 I f is symmetric) and convex and π1 = 1
2, then
the optimal a = 0. Thus in that case,
I f (P,Q) ≥ 2
∫ 1
2
ψ 1
(π − ψ 1)γf (π)dπ
= 2
[
( 1
2 − ψ 1)Γ f ( 1
2 ) + ¯Γ f (ψ 1) − ¯Γ f ( 1
2 )
]
= 2
[ V
4 Γ f ( 1
2 ) + ¯Γ f
(1
2 − V
4
)
− ¯Γ f ( 1
2 )
]
. (80)
Appendix B. Examples of Generalised Pinsker Inequality
Combining the above with (78) leads to a range of Pinsker style bounds for symmetric I f :
Jeffrey’s Divergence J(P,Q) = KL(P,Q) + KL(Q,P). Thus γ(π) = 1
π2(1−π) + 1
π(1−π)2 = 1
π2(1−π)2 .
(As a check, f (t) = (t − 1)ln(t), f ′′(t) = t+1
t2 and so γf (π) = 1
π3 f ′(1−π
π
)
= 1
π2(1−π)2 .) Thus
J(P,Q) ≥ 2
∫ 1/2
ψ 1
(π − ψ 1)
π2(1 − π)2 dπ
= ( 4ψ 1 − 2)(ln(ψ 1) − ln(1 − ψ 1)).
Substituting ψ 1 = 1
2 − V
4 gives
J(P,Q) ≥ V ln
(2 +V
2 −V
)
.
Observe that the above bound behaves likeV 2 for small V , and V ln
(2+V
2−V
)
≥ V 2 for V ∈ [0,2].
Using the traditional Pinkser inequality (KL(P,Q) ≥ V 2/2) we have
J(P,Q) = KL(P,Q) +KL(Q,P)
≥ V 2
2 + V 2
2
= V 2
788

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Jensen-Shannon Divergence Here f (t) = t
2 lnt − (t+1)
2 ln(t +1) +ln2 and thus the weight function
γf (π) = 1
π3 f ′′(1−π
π
)
= 1
2π(1−π). Thus
JS(P,Q) = 2
∫ 1
2
ψ 1
π − ψ 1
2π(1 − π)dπ
= ln(1 − ψ 1) − ψ 1 ln(1 − ψ 1) +ψ 1 lnψ 1 + ln(2).
Substituting ψ 1 = 1
2 − V
4 leads to
JS(P,Q) ≥
(1
2 − V
4
)
ln(2 −V ) +
(1
2 + V
4
)
ln(2 +V ) − ln(2).
Hellinger Divergence Here f (t) = (√t − 1)2. Consequently the weight function
γf (π) = 1
π3 f ′′
(1 − π
π
)
= 1
π3
1
2 ((1 − π)/π)3/2 = 1
2[π(1 − π)]3/2
and thus
h2(P,Q) ≥ 2
∫ 1
2
ψ 1
π − ψ 1
2[π(1 − π)]3/2 dπ
= 4√ψ 1(ψ 1 − 1) +2√1 − ψ 1√1 − ψ 1
=
4
√
1
2 − V
4
(1
2 − V
4 − 1
)
+ 2
√
1 − 1
2 + V
4
√
1 − 1
2 + V
4
= 2 − (2 +V )√2 −V√2 +V
= 2 −
√
4 −V 2.
For small V , 2 −
√
4 −V 2 ≈ V 2/4.
Arithmetic-Geometric Mean Divergence Here f (t) = t+1
2 ln
(
t+1
2√t
)
. Thus f ′′(t) = t2+1
4t2(t+1) and
hence γf (π) = 1
π3 f ′′(1−π
π
)
= γf (π) = 2π2−2π+1
π2(π−1)2 and thus
T (P,Q) ≥ 2
∫ 1
2
ψ 1
(π − ψ 1)2π2 − 2π + 1
π2(π − 1)2 dπ
= −1
2 ln(1 − ψ ) − 1
2 ln(ψ ) − ln(2).
Substituting ψ 1 = 1
2 − V
4 gives
T (P,Q) ≥ − 1
2 ln
(1
2 + V
4
)
− 1
2 ln
(1
2 − V
4
)
− ln(2)
= ln
( 4√
4 −V 2
)
− ln(2).
789

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Symmetric χ2-Divergence Here Ψ (P,Q) = χ2(P,Q) +χ2(Q,P) and thus (see below) γf (π) = 2
π3 +
2
(1−π)3 . (As a check, from f (t) = (t−1)2(t+1)
t we have f ′′(t) = 2(t3+1)
t3 and thus γf (π) =
1
π3 f ′′(1−π
π
)
gives the same result.)
Ψ (P,Q) ≥ 2
∫ 1
2
ψ 1
(π − ψ 1)
( 2
π3 + 2
(1 − π)3
)
dπ
= 2(1 + 4ψ 2
1 − 4ψ 1)
ψ 1(ψ 1 − 1) .
Substituting ψ 1 = 1
2 − V
4 gives Ψ (P,Q) ≥ 8V 2
4−V 2 .
When γf is not symmetric, one needs to use (79) instead of the simpler (80). We consid er two
special cases.
χ2-Divergence Here f (t) = (t −1)2 and so f ′′(t) = 2 and hence γ(π) = f ′′(1−π
π
)
/π3 = 2
π3 which is
not symmetric. Upon substituting 2/π3 for γ(π) in (79) and evaluating the integrals we obtain
χ2(P,Q) ≥ 2 min
a∈[−2ψ 1,2ψ 1]
1 + 4ψ 2
1 − 4ψ 1
2ψ 1 − a − 1 + 4ψ 2
1 − 4ψ 1
2ψ 1 − a − 2  
=:J(a,ψ 1)
.
One can then solve ∂
∂aJ(a,ψ 1) = 0 for a and one obtains a∗ = 2ψ 1 − 1. Now a∗> −2ψ 1 only
if ψ 1> 1
4. One can check that when ψ 1 ≤ 1
4, then a ↦→J(a,ψ 1) is monotonically increasing
for a ∈ [−2ψ 1,2ψ 1] and hence the minimum occurs at a∗ = −2ψ 1. Thus the value of a
minimising J(a,ψ 1) is
a∗ = /llbracketψ 1> 1/4/rrbracket(2ψ 1 − 1) +/llbracketψ 1 ≤ 1/4/rrbracket(−2ψ 1).
Substituting the optimal value of a∗ into J(a,ψ 1) we obtain
J(a∗,ψ 1) = /llbracketψ 1>1/4/rrbracket(2 + 8ψ 2
1 − 8ψ 1) +/llbracketψ 1 ≤1/4/rrbracket
(1 + 4ψ 2
1 − 4ψ
4ψ − 1 + 4ψ 2
1 − 4ψ
4ψ 1 − 2
)
.
Substituting ψ 1 = 1
2 − V
4 and observing that V < 1 ⇒ ψ 1> 1/4 we obtain
χ2(P,Q) ≥ /llbracketV < 1/rrbracketV 2 + /llbracketV ≥ 1/rrbracketV
(2 −V ).
Observe that the bound diverges to ∞ as V → 2.
Kullback-Leibler Divergence In this case f (t) =t lnt and thus f ′′(t) = 1/t and the weight function
γf (π) = 1
π3 f ′′(1−π
π
)
= 1
π2(1−π) which is clearly not symmetric. From (79) we obtain
KL(P,Q) ≥ min
[−2ψ 1,2ψ 1]
(
1 − a
2 − ψ 1
)
ln
(a + 2ψ 1 − 2
a − 2ψ 1
)
+
(a
2 + ψ 1
)
ln
( a + 2ψ 1
a − 2ψ 1 + 2
)
.
Substituting ψ 1 = 1
2 − V
4 gives KL(P,Q) ≥ mina∈[ V −2
2 , 2−V
2 ] δa(V ), where
δa(V ) =
(V + 2 − 2a
4
)
ln
(2a − 2 −V
2a − 2 +V
)
+
(2a + 2 −V
4
)
ln
(2a + 2 −V
2a + 2 +V
)
.
Set β := 2a and we have (59).
790

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Appendix C. Background and Prior Work
Speciﬁc prior results are referred to in the body of the paper. We now br ieﬂy indicate the broad
sweep of prior work along the lines of the present paper.
The most important precursors and inspiration are the three nearly simultane ous25 works by
Buja et al. (2005), Liese and Vajda (2006) and Nguyen et al. (2005). The work by Dawid (2007)
is also very similar in spirit to that presented here. A crucial difference is th at he relies on a para-
metric viewpoint, and can use the machinery of Riemannian geometry. Zhang (2 004a); Zhang and
Matsuzoe (2009) have developed a number of connections between convex functions, the Bregman
divergences they induce, and Riemannian geometry. All of the results in the present paper are, in
contrast, “coordinate-free.” Themotivation of the present work is closely aligned with that of Hand
(1994) whose avowed aim was to “stimulate debate about the need to formulate research questions
sufﬁciently precisely that they may be unambiguously and correctly matched w ith statistical tech-
niques.” Hand and Vinciotti (2003) develop some reﬁned machine learningtasks that can be viewed
as weighted problems (in the sense of the weight functions we make extensive use of in this paper);
confer Buja et al. (2005).
The paper presents a uniﬁcation of sorts. This, in itself, is hardly new in mac hine learning.
There are different approaches to uniﬁcation. One distinction is between Monistic and Pluralistic
approaches (James, 1909; Turkle and Papert, 1992); this corresponds to the hedgehog/fox distinction
of Berlin (1953).
Monistic approaches aim for a single all encompassing theory.26 A problem with most monistic
approaches is that you have to accept it “all or nothing.” There are man y unifying approaches
developed in Statistics and Machine learning that have left little trace; For exa mple, Nelson’s use
of non-standard analysis (Nelson, 1987; Lutz and Musio, 2005) as the foundations for probability;
Topsøe’s (2006), Shafer and V ovk’s (2001) game theory as a basis , and Le Cam’s use of Riesz
measures on a vector lattice to replace the traditional sample space (LeCam, 1964).
Pluralistic approaches are closer to what is proposed here (where, instead of s earching for a
single master representation, we study relationships and translations betwee n a range of different
representations). It resonates with Kiefer’s assertion that “Statistics is too complex to be codiﬁed in
terms of a simple prescription that is a panacea for all settings, and . . . one mu st look as carefully
as possible at a variety of possible procedures. . . ” (Kiefer, 1977). Examples of existing pluralistic
attempts include limited problem catalogs such as for different notions of cost (Turney, 2000) or a
restricted set of problems (Raudys, 2001).
The decision theoretic approach (DeGroot, 1970; Berger, 1985; Kief er, 1987) due to Wald
(1950, 1949) is central to the present paper. The idea of seeking primitives for statistics dates
back at least to the elementary experiments of Birnbaum (1961). The relatio nship between risks
and Bregman divergences is studied by Gr¨unwald and Dawid (2004) and Buja et al. (2005).
25. Nguyen et al. (2005) is dated 13 October, 2005, Liese and Vajda (2 006) was received on 26 October 2005 and Buja
et al. (2005) is dated 3 November 2005. Shen’s PhD thesis (Shen, 2005), which contains most of the material in Buja
et al. (2005), is dated 16 October 2005. The paper by Nguyen et al. (2005) has now appeared as Nguyen et al. (2009).
26. Monistic approaches can be categorised into at least four distinct ca tegories. They are brieﬂy summarised in Ap-
pendix C.1.
791

REID AND WILLIAMSON
There are numerous possible deﬁnitions of information. Many of them are s terile; Csisz ´ar
(1978) and Acz ´el (1984) provide a critical analysis. Floridi (2004) discusses pluralis tic versus
monistic approach: is there one single deﬁnition of information, or should ther e be many different
deﬁnitions depending on the particular problem? Our view, like Shannon (19 48), is that there are
many types. Shannon information was developed with communications problems inmind—there is
no reason why it is the only notion of information that makes sense for learning and inference.
There are many known relationships between risks and divergences between distributions many
of which we explicitly discuss later in the paper. General results include thos e due to ¨Osterreicher
(2003), ¨Osterreicher and Vajda (1993), Gutenbrunner (1990), Liese and Vajda (2006), Goel and De-
Groot (1979) and Golic (1987). Particular relations between risk in binar y classiﬁcation problems
and f -divergences are not new (Poor and Thomas, 1977; Kailath, 1967). Some more general re-
sults that relate the choice of loss function in a binary learning problem to particular f -divergences
between the class-conditional distributions have been (re)-discovered (Eguchi and Copas, 2001;
Nguyen et al., 2005; ¨Osterreicher and Vajda, 1993). Known results relating different distan ces be-
tween probability distributions are summarised by Gibbs and Su (2002).
The idea of solving a machine learning problem by using a solution to some other learning
problem is now called a machine learning reduction (Beygelzimer et al., 2008, 2005) The idea is
not new. Equivalences are a natural structuring device and were exp licit in Ashby’s foundational
work on cybernetics (Ashby, 1956), a precursor to Machine Learnin g. Ben-Bassat (1978) studied
the concept of ε-equivalence, Conover and Iman (1981) showed how rank tests can b e derived
by applying nonparametric tests to order statistics, and Goldman et al. (1989) and Bartlett et al.
(1996) used reductions for theoretical purposes. However recently there has been a large number
of explicit constructions of reductions (Zadrozny et al., 2003; Langfo rd, 2006; Beygelzimer et al.,
2005; Langford and Beygelzimer, 2005; Langford and Zadrozny, 2005; Langford et al., 2006; Li and
Lin, 2007; Beygelzimer et al., 2007; Langford, 2007; Scott and Daven port, 2007),or development
of results which although not explicitly called reductions are effectively so (Brown et al., 2002;
Brown and Low, 1996; Brown and Zhao, 2003; Chaudhuri and Loh, 2002; Cossock and Zhang,
2006; Cuevas and Fraiman, 1997; Domingos, 1999; Steinwart et al., 2005; Tasche, 2001). Two key
differences between the recent machine learning reductions literature an d the present paper is that
our relationships between problems are (usually) exact (instead of appr oximate) and we work with
the true underlying distributions (rather than ﬁnite sample distributions).
The theory of Comparison of Experiments , developed by Blackwell (1951, 1953), and signif-
icantly extended by LeCam (1964, 1986) is also related to the overall goal set out here. It has
been used to deﬁne notions of isomorphism for statistical problems (Morse a nd Sacksteder, 1966;
Sacksteder, 1967) and is the subject of three books (Strasser, 1985 ; Torgersen, 1991; Heyer, 1982)
and a recent review (Goel and Ginebra, 2003). The key difference with the present work is that the
comparison of experiments theory seeks results that hold for all loss functions rather than for a par-
ticular one; with a few exceptions (Torgersen, 1991, Chapter 10). Blackwell related comparisons to
sufﬁcient statistics and characterised comparisons. LeCam (1964) qua ntiﬁed comparisons in terms
of the degree to which one experiment is “better than” another (the deﬁcien cy distance). There are
very few known examples of deﬁciency distance (Carter, 2002). Furth ermore LeCam’s theory is
formulated in a particularly abstract way to make its theorems elegant (Yang an d Le Cam, 1999).
Renowned probabilists concur that its arcane formulation has made it inacce ssible (van der Vaart,
2002; Pollard, 2000; Strasser, 2000). Consequently the subject has had relatively limited impact.
792

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Graphical representations have been used for a long while to better unde rstand binary experi-
ments. In the main body of the paper we develop connections between Receiver Operating Charac-
teristic (ROC) curves, (Fawcett, 2006, 2004; Flach, 2003; Flach and Wu, 2005; Maxion and Roberts,
2004) the Area Under ROC Curve (AUC), (Cortes and Mohri, 2004; Ha nd, 2008; Hand and Till,
2001; Hanley and McNeil, 1982) and Cost Curves (Drummond and Holte, 2006; Torgersen, 1991).
These can be seen as representations of Binary Experiments.
C.1 Summary of Previous “Monistic” Approaches to Uniﬁcation
There are are range of different approaches to unifying machine lear ning from a monistic perspec-
tive:
Low level data interchange: There is a small amount of work on developing standards for inter-
changing data sets (Grossman et al., 2002; Carey et al., 2007; Wettschereck and Muller, 2001)—this
is analogous to PDDL (Ghallab et al., 1998). There are also some limited higherlevel attempts such
as ontologies (Soldatova and King, 2006) and general frameworks (Fayyad et al., 1996).
Modelling frameworks: To solve a machine learning problem, one needs models. There is a
rich literature on graphical models (Jordan, 1999), factor graphs (Ks chischang et al., 2001) and
Markov logic networks (Domingos and Richardson, 2004; Richardson and Domingos, 2006) which
have allowed the uniﬁcation of sets of problems (Worthen and Stark, 2001) , with a focus on the
modelling and computational techniques for particular problems.
Comparison of frameworks: There are several philosophical frameworks/approaches to design-
ing inference and learning algorithms. Barnett (1999), Bayarri and Berger (2004) and Berger (2003)
compare and contrast these. They are effectively comparing differen t monistic frameworks, not
comparing problems.
Overarching frameworks: These include frameworks such as Bayesian (Robert, 1994), informa-
tion theoretic (Jenssen, 2005b; Harremo¨es, 1993), game-theoretic (V ovk et al., 2005; Gr¨unwald and
Dawid, 2004), MDL (Gr ¨unwald, 2007; Rissanen, 2007), regularised distance minimisation (Bor-
wein and Lewis, 1991; Altun and Smola, 2006; Broniatowski, 2004), and mo re narrowly focussed
“unifying frameworks” such as information geometry (Dawid, 2007; Eguc hi, 2005), exponential
families (Canu and Smola, 2006) and the information bottleneck (Tishby et al., 2000).
Appendix D. Examples and Prior Work on Surrogate Regret Bounds
Surrogate regret bounds have garnered interest in the machine learning community (Zhang, 2004b;
Bartlett et al., 2006; Steinwart, 2007; Steinwart and Christmann, 2008). S teinwart and Christmann
(2008, Chapter 3) have presented a good summary of recent work.
All of the recent work has been in terms of margin losses of the form
Lφ(η, ˆh) = ηφ (ˆh) + (1 − η )φ(−ˆh).
As Buja et al. (2005) discuss, such margin losses can not capture the richness of all possible proper
losses. Bartlett et al. (2006) prove that for any ˆh
ψ
(
L0−1(η, ˆh) − L
0−1(η )
)
≤ Lφ(η, ˆh) − Lφ(η ),
where ψ = ˜ψ⋆⋆ is the LF biconjugate of ˜ψ ,
˜ψ (θ) = H−
(1 + θ
2
)
− H
(1 + θ
2
)
,
793

REID AND WILLIAMSON
H(η ) = Lφ(η ) and
H−(η ) = inf
α : α (2η −1)≤0
(ηφ (α ) + (1 − η )φ(−α ))
is the optimal conditional risk under the constraint that the sign of the argumen t α disagrees with
2η − 1.
We will consider two examples presented by Bartlett et al. (2006) and show that the bounds we
obtain with the above theorem match the results we obtain with Theorem 25.
Exponential Loss Consider the link ˆh = ψ ( ˆη ) = 1
2 ln ˆη
1− ˆη with corresponding inverse link ˆη =
1
1+e−2ˆh . Buja et al. (2005) showed that this link function combined with exponential ma rgin
loss φ(γ) = e−γ results in a proper scoring rule
L(η, ˆη ) = η
(1 − ˆη
ˆη
)1
2
+ (1 − η )
( ˆη
1 − ˆη
)1
2
.
From (32) we obtain
w(η ) = 1
2[η (1 − η )]
3
2
.
(Note Buja et al., 2005 have missed the factor of 1
2.) Thus W (η ) = 2η −1√
η (1−η ) and W (η ) =
−2
√
η (1 − η ). Hence we obtain
L(η ) = 2
√
η (1 − η ) (81)
and from (46) we obtain that if B 1
2
(η, ˆη ) = α then
B(η, ˆη ) ≥ 1 −
√
1 − 4α 2. (82)
Equations 81 and 82 match the results presented by Bartlett et al. (2006) up on noting that
B 1
2
(η, ˆη ) measures the loss in terms ofℓ 1
2
and Bartlett et al. (2006) usedℓ0−1 = 2ℓ 1
2
.
Truncated Quadratic Loss Consider the margin loss φ(ˆh) = ( 1 + ˆh ∨ 0)2 = (2 ˆη ∨ 0)2 with link
function ˆh( ˆη ) = 2 ˆη − 1. From (32) we obtain L(η ) = 4η (1 − η ) and from (46) the regret
bound B(η, ˆη ) ≥ 4α 2. These match the results presented by Bartlett et al. (2006) when again
it is noted we usedℓ 1
2
and they usedℓ0−1.
The above results are for c0 = 1
2. Generalisations of margin losses to the case of uneven weights are
presented by Steinwart and Christmann (2008, Section 3.5). Nevertheless, since the sameφ function
is still used for both components of the loss (albeit with unequal weights) suc h a scheme can still
not capture the full generality of all proper scoring rules in the manner ac hieved by the results in
Section 7.1.
Appendix E. History of Pinsker Inequalities
Pinsker (1964) presented the ﬁrst bound relating KL (P,Q) to V (P,Q): KL ≥ V 2/2 and it is now
known by his name or sometimes as the Pinsker-Csisz ´ar-Kullback inequality since Csisz ´ar (1967)
794

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
presented another version and Kullback (1967) showed KL ≥ V 2/2 +V 4/36. Much later Topsøe
(2001) showed KL ≥ V 2/2 +V 4/36 +V 6/270. Non-polynomial bounds are due to Vajda (1970):
KL ≥ LVajda(V ) := ln
(2+V
2−V
)
− 2V
2+V and Toussaint (1978) who showed KL ≥ LVajda(V ) ∨ (V 2/2 +
V 4/36 +V 8/288).
Care needs to be taken when comparing results from the literature as different deﬁnitions for the
divergences exist. For example Gibbs and Su (2002) use a deﬁnition of V that differs by a factor of
2 from ours. There are some isolated bounds relatingV to some other divergences, analogous to the
classical Pinkser bound; Kumar and Chhina (2005) have presented a summary as well as new bounds
for a wide range of symmetric f -divergences by making assumptions on the likelihood ratio: r ≤
p(x)/q(x) ≤ R< ∞ for all x ∈ X. This line of reasoning has also been developed by Dragomir et al.
(2001) and Taneja (2005a,b). Topsøe (2000) has presented some inﬁ nite series representations for
capacitory discrimination in terms of triangular discrimination which lead to inequalitie s between
those two divergences. Liese and Miescke (2008, p.48) give the inequ ality V ≤ h
√
4 − h2 (which
seems to be originally due to LeCam, 1986) which when rearranged corres ponds exactly to the
bound for h2 in theorem 31. Withers (1999) has also presented some inequalities between other
(particular) pairs of divergences; his reasoning is also in terms of inﬁnite series expansions.
Unterreiter et al. (2000) considered the case of n = 1 but arbitrary I f (that is they bound an
arbitrary f -divergence in terms of the variational divergence). Their argument is similar to the
geometric proof of Theorem 30. They do not compute any of the explicit bo unds in theorem 31
except they state (page 243) χ2(P,Q) ≥ V 2 which is looser than (58).
Gilardoni (2006a) showed (via an intricate argument) that if f ′′′(1) exists, then I f ≥ f ′′(1)V 2
2 . He
also showed some fourth order inequalities of the form I f ≥ c2, fV 2 + c4, fV 4 where the constants
depend on the behaviour of f at 1 in a complex way. Gilardoni (2006b,c) presented a completely
different approach which obtains many of the results of theorem 31.27 Gilardoni (2006c) improved
Vajda’s bound slightly to KL(P,Q) ≥ ln 2
2−V − 2−V
2 ln 2+V
2 .
Gilardoni (2006b,c) presented a general tight lower bound forI f (P,Q) in terms ofV (P,Q) which
is difﬁcult to evaluate explicitly in general:
I f ≥ V
2
( f [g−1
R (k(1/V ))]
g−1
R (k(1/V )) − 1 + f [g−1
L (k(1/V ))]
1 − g−1
L (k(1/V ))
)
,
where k−1(t) = 1
2
(
1
1−g−1
L (t) + 1
g−1
R (t)−1
)
, g(u) = ( u−1) f ′(u) − f (u), g−1
R [g(u)] = u for u ≥ 1 and
g−1
L [g(u)] = u for u ≤ 1. He presented a new parametric form for I f = KL in terms of Lambert’sW
function. In general, the result is analogous to that of Fedotov et al. (2003) in that it is in a parametric
form which, if one wishes to evaluate for a particularV , one needs to do a one dimensional numerical
search—as complex as (59). However, when f is such that I f is symmetric, this simpliﬁes to the
elegant form I f ≥ 2−V
2 f
(2+V
2−V
)
− f ′(1)V . He presented explicit special cases for h2, J, Δ and I
identical to the results in Theorem 31. It is not apparent to us how the appr oach of Gilardoni
(2006b,c) could be extended to more general situations such as that in Theorem 30 (i.e., n> 1).
Finally Bolley and Villani (2005) have consideredweighted versions of the Pinsker inequalities
(bounds for a weighted generalisation of Variational divergence) in terms of KL-divergence that are
related to transportation inequalities.
27. We were unaware of these two papers until completing the results presented in the main paper.
795

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Appendix F. Variational Representation of I f and its Generalizations
The variational representation of the Variational divergence (62) sug gests the question of whether
there is a variational representation for a generalf -divergence. This has been considered previously.
We brieﬂy summarise the approach, and then explore some (new) implications of the representation.
One can obtain a variational representation for I f by substituting a variational representation
for f into the deﬁnition of I f (Keziou, 2003a,b; Broniatowski, 2004; Broniatowski and Keziou,
2009). Let p and q denote the densities corresponding to P and Q and assume for now they ex-
ist. Recall from Section 2.2 above, that the Legendre-Fenchel conjuga te of f is given by f⋆(s) =
supu∈Dom f us − f (u). In general Ran f⋆ = R⋆ := R ∪ {+∞ }. Since f (u) = supρ∈R uρ − f⋆(ρ), we
can write
I f (P,Q) =
∫
X
q(x) sup
ρ∈R
(
ρ p(x)
q(x) − f⋆(ρ)
)
dx
= sup
ρ∈RX
∫
X
ρ(x)p(x) − f⋆(ρ(x))q(x)dx.
= sup
ρ∈RX
(EPρ − EQ f⋆(ρ)). (83)
We make this concrete by considering the variational divergence. The co rresponding f is given by
f (t) = |t − 1| and (adopting the convention that /llbracketfalse/rrbracketis a “very strong zero” so /llbracketfalse/rrbracket·∞ = 0;
confer Knuth, 1992)
f⋆(x) = /llbracketx ̸∈[−1,1]/rrbracket∞ + /llbracketx ∈ [−1,1]/rrbracketx.
Since the supremum in (83) will not be attained if the second term is inﬁnite, one can restrict the
supremum to be over F = {ρ ∈ RX : ∥ρ∥∞ ≤ 1}. Thus
V (P,Q) = sup
ρ : ∥ρ∥∞ ≤1
(EPρ − EQρ) = sup
ρ∈{−1,1}X
(EPρ − EQρ)
= sup
ρ∈{0,2}X
(EPρ − EQρ) = 2 sup
ρ∈{0,1}X
(EPρ − EQρ)
= 2sup
A
|P(A) − Q(A)|,
since the supremum will be attained for functions ρ taking on values only in {−1,1} and the re-
maining steps are simply a shift and rescaling (to {0,2} by adding 1, and then to {0,1}).
The representation (83) suggests the generalisation
I f,F(P,Q) := sup
ρ∈F⊆RX
∫
X
ρ(x)p(x) − f⋆(ρ(x))q(x)dx
= sup
ρ∈F
(EPρ − EQ f⋆(ρ)).
Observing this is not symmetric in p and q suggests a further generalisation:
I f,g,F(P,Q) := sup
ρ∈F⊆RX
∫
X
−g⋆(ρ(x))p(x) − f⋆(ρ(x))q(x)dx
= sup
ρ∈F
(−EPg⋆(ρ) − EQ f⋆(ρ)).
796

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Here g⋆ is the R⋆-valued LF conjugate of a convex function g. Set I f,g := I f,g,RX.
An alternative generalisation of I f is
˜I f,g,F(P,Q) := sup
ρ∈F
(EPg⋆(ρ) − EQ f⋆(ρ))
which is identical to (84) except for removal of the minus sign preceding g⋆. Set ˜I f,g := ˜I f,g,RX. If
ρ ∈ F are such that ∥ρ∥∞ is unbounded, then in general ˜If,g,F(P,Q) will be inﬁnite. Properties of the
alternative deﬁnition relate to the extended inﬁmal convolution between two convex functions.
Deﬁnition 35 Suppose f,g: R+ → R∗ are convex. The extended inﬁmal convolution is
( f □ g)(τ) := inf
x∈R+
f (x) +τg(x/τ), τ ∈ R+.
Note that the second term in this convolution is the perspective function (Section 2.1) applied to g,
that is, Ig(x,τ).
Theorem 36 Suppose f,g: R+ → R∗ are convex. Then
1. I f (P,Q) = I f,RX(P,Q), ˜I f,id,F(P,Q) = I f,F(P,Q), and
It↦→|t−1|,F(P,Q) = 2VF, 1
2
(P,Q).
2. ˜I f1,g1,F = I f2,g2,F only if f 1 − f2 = fa and g1 − g2 = ga and f 1, f2, fa,g1,g2,ga are afﬁne.
3. I f, f,F = Iid,id, f⋆(F)(P,Q).
4. ˜I f, f,F = ˜Iid,id, f⋆(F)(P,Q) = 2Vf⋆(F)(P,Q).
5. I f,g = I f □ g.
Proof Part 1 follows immediately from the various deﬁnitions. Since afﬁne functions are the only
functions that are simultaneously convex and concave, ˜I f1,g1,F = I f2,g2,F only if f1, f2 (resp. g1,g2)
are afﬁne and their differences are afﬁne (since an afﬁne offset w ill not change ˜I). This proves part
2.
We have by change of variables
˜I f, f,F(P,Q) = sup
ρ∈F
(EP f⋆(ρ) − EQ f⋆(ρ)) = sup
ψ ∈ f⋆(F)
(EPψ − EQψ ) = ˜Iid,id, f⋆(F)(P,Q),
where f⋆(F) := { f⋆ ◦ρ : ρ ∈ F}. (The same argument applies toI f, f,F although supψ ∈g⋆(F)(−EPψ −
EQψ ) does not correspond to a generalised variational divergence.) This proves parts 3 and 4.
In order to prove 5 we need the following lemma.
Lemma 37 Let f : R → R and K : R × R → R be convex and bounded from below. Then the
extended inﬁmal convolution
( f □ K)(x) = inf
y∈R
f (y) +K(x,y), x ∈ R
is convex in x ∈ R.
797

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Observe that if K(x,y) = g(x −y) for convex g, then f □ K = f ⊕g, the standard inﬁmal convolution
(Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar ´echal, 1993b). This extended inﬁmal convolution seems little studied
with the exception owith the exception of Cepedello-Boiso (1998).
Proof Let ˜f (x,y) := f (y), x ∈ R. Clearly ˜f is convex on R × R. Let ˜h(x,y) = ˜f (x,y) + K(x,y).
Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´echal (1993b, Proposition 2.1.1) show that ˜h is convex on R × R. Observe
that ( f □ K)(x) = inf{˜h(x,y): y ∈ R}, that is, the marginal function of ˜h. Since by construction ˜h is
bounded from below, using the result of Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar ´echal (1993b, p.169) proves the
result.
Corollary 38 For any convex f and g, f □ g is convex.
Proof Observe that ( f □ g)(x) = infy∈R+ f (y) +xg(y/x) = infy∈R+ f (y) +Ig(x,y), x ∈ R+, where Ig
is the perspective function (1). Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´echal (1993b, Proposition 2.2.1) show that
if g: Rn → R is convex then the perspective Ig is convex on Rn+1. The corollary then follows from
the lemma.
Proof (part 5 of Theorem 36) Observe that if h(x) = tφ(x) then the LF conjugate h∗(s) = tφ(s/t).
Thus using the Fenchel duality theorem (Rockafellar, 1970) we have, using (Rockafellar and Wets,
2004, Theorem 14.60) to justify the swapping the order of the supremum and integration,
I f,g(P,Q) = sup
ρ∈ ¯RX
∫
X
−g⋆(ρ(x))p(x) − f⋆(ρ(x))q(x)dx
=
∫
X
sup
ρ∈ ¯R
−g⋆(ρ)p(x) − f⋆(ρ)q(x)dx
=
∫
X
inf
ρ∈ ¯R
f
( ρ
q(x)
)
+ g
( ρ
p(x)
)
dx
=
∫
X
inf
ρ∈ ¯R
q(x) f
( ρ
q(x)
)
+ p(x)g
( ρ
p(x)
)
dx
=
∫
X
i f,g(p,q)(x)dx,
where
i f,g(p,q)(·) := inf
ρ∈ ¯R
q(·) f
( ρ
q(·)
)
+ p(·)g
( ρ
p(·)
)
.
Let x := ρ
q ∈ ¯R+. Thus ρ = xq and
i f,g(p,q) = inf
x∈ ¯R+
q f(x) + pg(xq/p).
Let τ = p
q ∈ ¯R+. Thus
i f,g(p,q)(τ) = inf
x∈R+
q f(x) + pg(x/τ)
= q
[
inf
x∈ ¯R+
f (x) +τg(x/τ)
]
= q ·( f □ g)(τ). (84)
798

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Let h := f □ g. Observe from (84) that i f,g(p,q) = qh(p/q) and thus
I f,g(p,q) =
∫
X
q(x)h
(p(x)
q(x)
)
dx = Ih(p,q)
if h is convex, which we know to be the case from Corollary 38.
It suggests the question: given a suitable convexf , does there always existg such that f = g□ g?
This is analogous to the question of spectral factorisation (Sayed and Kaila th, 2001) for ordinary
linear convolution. We do not know the answer to this question, but have collected a few examples
in Appendix G that demonstrates it is certainly true forsome f . There does not appear to be a result
analogous to part 5 of Theorem 36 for ˜I f,g.
We have seen how f -divergences are related to integral probability metrics VF. It turns out that
the variational divergence is special in being both. Many integral probability metrics are true metrics
(M¨uller, 1997a,b). The only f -divergence that is a metric is the variational divergence. Whether
there exist F such that VF(·, ·) is not a metric but equals I f (·, ·) for some f ̸= t ↦→ |t − 1| (or afﬁne
transformation thereof) is left as an open problem.28
We end with another open problem. We have seen how LF and VF are related. This begs the
question whether there is a representation of the form
I f,F(P,Q) ?=
∫ 1
0
Δ L0−1
F (π,P,Q)γf (π)dπ.
Appendix G. Examples of Extended Convolution Factorisation
In this section we present three examples of f which can be written as f = g□ g.
If g(t) = ( t − 1)2 (corresponding to Pearson χ2 divergence), (g□ g)(τ) = infx∈R+(x − 1)2 +
τ(x/τ − 1)2. Differentiating the right-hand side with respect to x, setting to zero and solving for
x gives x = 4
2(1+1/τ). Substituting we obtain (g□ g)(τ) = (τ−1)2
τ−1 which is the f for Δ (P,Q), the
triangular discrimination.
If g(t) = t ln(t), a similar straightforward calculation yields (g□ g)(τ) = −2√τ
e .
If g(t) = ( √t − 1)2 (corresponding to Hellinger divergence) then a similar calculation yields
(g□ g)(τ) = 1
2 (√τ−1)2 = g(τ)/2. Thus this g plays a role analogous to a gaussian kernel in ordinary
convolution. The signiﬁcance of this is unclear.
We summarise the results (and the associated g⋆) in the following table.
g(t) ( g□ g)(τ) g⋆(s)
(t − 1)2 (τ−1)2
τ−1
s2
4 + s
t lnt −2√τ
e es−1
(√t − 1)2 1
2 (√τ− 1)2 s
1−s /llbrackets< 1/rrbracket+ ∞ /llbrackets ≥ 1/rrbracket
28. This has in fact been solved by Sriperumbudur et al. (2009) sincean earlier version of the present paper was published
as an ArXiV preprint.
799

REID AND WILLIAMSON
Whilst it is indeed straightforward to compute (g□ g) given g (although a simple closed form is
not always possible), it is far from obvious how to go from a given f to a g such that f = g□ g.
Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar ´echal (1993a, page 69) show that for f convex on R+, g convex and
increasing on R+,
(g ◦ f )⋆(s) = inf
α>0
α f⋆( s
α ) +g⋆(α ) = f⋆□ g⋆.
This illuminates the difﬁculty of the above “factorisation problem”. It is equiva lent to: given a
convex increasing f⋆, ﬁnd a convex increasing g⋆ such that f⋆ = g⋆ ◦ g⋆.
Appendix H. Empirical Estimators of VBH, 1
2
(P,Q) and SVMs
This appendix further develops the observations made in Section 8.2 regarding the relationship be-
tween divergence and risk when R = BH, a unit ball in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space H. In
contrast to the rest of the paper (which focussed on relationships involv ing the underlying distri-
butions), in this appendix we will consider the practical situation where there is only an empirical
sample. We will see how the general results have interesting implications for sample based machine
learning algorithms.
If we require an empirical estimate of VR,π(P,Q) we can replace P and Q by empirical distribu-
tions. We will use weighted empirical distributions. Given an independent identically distributed
sample w = (w1,..., wm) ∈ Xm the ααα -weighted empirical distribution ˆPααα
w with respect tow is deﬁned
by
d ˆPααα
w :=
m
∑
i=1
α iδ(· −wi)
where ααα = (α 1,..., α m), α i ≥ 0, i = 1,..., m and ∑ m
i=1 α i = 1. We will write ˆEααα
wφ := E ˆPαααw
φ =
∑ m
i=1 α iφ(wi). Thus
V 2
R, 1
2
( ˆPααα
w, ˆPβββ
z ) = 1
2 ∥ ˆEααα
wφ − ˆEβββ
z ∥2
H.
Suppose now that P and Q correspond to the positive and negative class conditional distributions.
Let x := (x1,..., xm) be a sample drawn from M = πP + (1 − π)Q with corresponding label vector
y = (y1,..., ym). Let I := {1,..., m}, I+ := {i ∈ I : yi = 1}, I− := {i ∈ I : yi = −1}. Consider a
weight vector ααα = (α 1,..., α m) over the whole sample. Thus
ˆEPφ = ∑
i∈I+
α iφ(xi) and ˆEQφ = ∑
i∈I−
α iφ(xi)
where we also require
∑
i∈I+
α i = m+
m and ∑
i∈I−
α i = m−
m
and hence
∑
i∈I
α iyi = m+ − m−
m .
800

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
Substituting into (65) we have
2VBH, 1
2
( ˆP, ˆQ) =
⟨ ˆEPφ − ˆEQφ, ˆEPφ − ˆEQφ
⟩
=
⟨
∑
i∈I+
α iφ(xi) − ∑
i∈I−
α iφ(xi), ∑
j∈I+
α jφ(x j) − ∑
j∈I−
α j
⟩
=
⟨
∑
i∈I
α iyiφ(xi),∑
j∈I
α jy jφ(x j)
⟩
= ∑
i∈I
∑
j∈I
α iα jyiy j⟨φ(xi),φ(x j)⟩
= ∑
i∈I
∑
j∈I
α iα jyiy jk(xi,x j) =: J(ααα,x). (85)
We now consider three different choices ofααα .
Uniform weighting If we set α i = 1
m, i = 1,..., m, then (85) becomes
1
m2 ∑
i, j∈I
yiy jk(xi,x j) = MMD2
b[BH,xxx+,xxx−]
where xxx+ := (xi)i∈I+, xxx− := (xi)i∈I− and MMD b is the biased estimator of the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2008), an alternate name for VR. Observe that from theorem 34, this
case corresponds to using a Fisher linear discriminant in feature space ( Devroye et al., 1996) when
it is assumed that the within-class covariance matrices are both the identity matrix. This follows by
observing that the constructed hypothesis is identical in both cases.
Pessimistic Weighting Instead of weighting each sample equally, one can optimise over ααα . By
theorem 34, minimizing J(ααα,x) over ααα will maximize L
lin and is thus the most pessimistic choice.
Explicitly, we have
min
ααα
m
∑
i=1
m
∑
i=1
α iα jyiy jk(xi,x j) (86)
s.t. α i ≥ 0, i = 1,..., m (87)
m
∑
i=1
α iyi = m+ − m−
m (88)
m
∑
i=1
α i = 1 (89)
which can be recognized as the support vector machine (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). The SVM uses
the sign of the “witness” (Gretton et al., 2008), x ↦→∑ m
i=1 α iyik(xi,x) as its predictor.
Interpolation between above two cases A parameterized interpolation between the above two
cases can be constructed by the addition of the constraints
α i ≤ 1
νm, i = 1,..., m, (90)
where ν ∈ (0,1] is an adjustable parameter. Observe that ν controls the sparsity of ααα since (90),
(87) and (89) together imply that |{i ∈ I : α i ̸= 0}| ≥ νm. Crisp and Burges (2000) have shown that
(86),... ,(90) is equivalent to the ν-SVM algorithm (Sch¨olkopf et al., 2000).
801

REID AND WILLIAMSON
While “information-theoretic” approaches to the SVM and weighted kernel representations are
hardly new,29 the results presented here are novel and provide a simple and direct der ivation of the
SVM via the generalised variational divergence.
If VBH, 1
2
( ˆPwww, ˆQzzz) is used as a test statistic to infer whether two samples www and zzz are drawn from
the same distribution (as Gretton et al., 2008 do), then when the distributions fr om which www and zzz
are drawn are close, the classiﬁcation performance of the corresponding classiﬁer (i.e., the classiﬁer
that uses the sign of the witness function) will be close to the worst possible. Thus one will be
operating in a regime distinct from the normal situation, where the risk is typically small.
Finally observe that the derivation of the SVM presented here could be viewed as an application
of an alternate “inductive principle”—a general recipe for constructing learning algorithms from
learning task speciﬁcation (Vapnik, 1989, 2006). The traditional Empirical Risk Minimization prin-
ciple entails replacing (P,Q) with ( ˆPxxx+, ˆQxxx−) in the deﬁnition of L(π,P,Q). Then, in order to not
overﬁt, one restricts the class of functions from which hypotheses are drawn. That is, there are two
approximations:
L(π,P,Q) Empirical Approximation (uniform)
− − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − →L(π, ˆPxxx+, ˆQxxx−) Restrict Class− − − − − − − − →LR(π, ˆPxxx+, ˆQxxx−).
Upon setting ααα + = (α i)i∈I+ and ααα − = (α i)i∈I−, the derivation presented above, in contrast, can be
summarised schematically by
“L(π,P,Q)” Restrict Class− − − − − − − − →LR(π,P,Q) Empirical Approximation (ααα -weighted)
− − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − →LR(π, ˆPααα +
xxx+ , ˆQααα −
xxx− ),
where a different loss (the “linear” loss) was used at the start. With that loss function, reversing the
order of the two approximations would not work, and is (thus) not equivalent to the ERM inductive
principle. The ﬁrst step makes L well deﬁned—with no restriction it is not, hence the quotes; and
will avoid overﬁtting in any case. The second step is the more general ( ααα -weighted) empirical
approximation.
We believe that this alternate derivation of the SVM is of interest because it is simpler (avoids
the need to introduces margins) and it elucidates the connection between the k ernel methods for
29. The use of kernel representations for classiﬁcation is of course n ot new: from the classical kernel classiﬁer (where
α i = 1/m for all i ∈ I) (Devroye et al., 1996, Chapter 10) to the Generalised Portrait (Aizer man et al., 1964), the
Generalised Discriminant (Baudat and Anouar, 2000) and the panoply of techniques inspired by Support Vector
Machines (Sch¨olkopf and Smola, 2002; Herbrich, 2002). None of these techniques is designed from the perspective
of minimising a f -divergence.
Principe et al. (2000a) have developed an approach to machine learning problems based on information theoretic
criteria (Principe et al., 2000b; Jenssen et al., 2004; Xu et al., 2005; Jenssen, 2005a; Jenssen et al., 2006; Pavia et al.,
2006). Jenssen et al. (2004, 2006) considered kernel methods fr om the perspective of Renyi’s quadratic entropy.
They do not exploit the formal relationship between maximising divergence and minimising risk. They interpret the
SVM as being constructed from weighted Parzen windows density estimates . Gretton et al. (2008) explained the
relationship between their MMD estimators and those derived from (unweig hted) Parzen windows estimates of the
class-conditional distributions. Weighted Parzen windows estimates were used as a basis for building a classiﬁer by
Babich and Camps (1996). Weighted empirical distributions are widely used in particle ﬁltering (Crisan and Doucet,
2002).
McDermott and Katagiri (2002) considered the direct optimisation of a classiﬁer built on top of Parzen windows
density estimates. They showed that the minimum classiﬁcation error criterio n is equivalent to a Parzen windows
estimate of the theoretical Bayes risk. They re-derive the traditional app roach of minimising an estimate of the
expected loss. McDermott and Katagiri (2003) extended their approac h to the multi-class setting in a way that takes
account of all the “other” classes better in estimating the probability of error of a given class.
802

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
classiﬁcation and MMD—indeed MMD is nothing but the Fisher linear discriminan t applied to a
binary problem induced by the given distributions P and Q.
References
H. Abelson, G.J. Sussman, and J. Sussman. Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs .
MIT Press, 1996.
J. Acz´el. Measuring information beyond communication theory — why some generalize d informa-
tion measures maybe be useful, others not. Aequationes Mathematicae, 27:1–19, 1984.
M. A. Aizerman, ´E. M. Braverman, and L. I. Rozono ´er. Theoretical foundations of the potential
function method in pattern recognition learning. Automation and Remote Control, 25:821–837,
1964.
S.M. Ali and S.D. Silvey. A general class of coefﬁcients of divergence of one distribution from
another. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) , 28(1):131–142,
1966.
Y . Altun and A. Smola. Unifying divergence minimization and statistical inferenc e via convex
duality. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 139–153,
2006.
P. Antosik, J. Mikusinski, and R. Sikorski. Theory of Distributions: The Sequential Approach .
American Elsevier, 1973.
W. R. Ashby. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman and Hall, 1956.
G.A. Babich and O.I. Camps. Weighted Parzen windows for pattern classiﬁc ation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 18(5):567–570, 1996.
F.R. Bach, D. Heckerman, and E. Horvitz. Considering cost asymmetry in le arning classiﬁers.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:1713–1741, 2006.
C.Y . Baldwin and K.B. Clark. Modularity in the design of complex engineering s ystems. In
Dan Braha Ali Minai and Yaneer Bar Yam, editors,Complex Engineered Systems: Science Meets
Technology. Springer, 2006a.
C.Y . Baldwin and K.B. Clark. Between ‘knowledge’ and ‘the economy’: Notes on the scientiﬁc
study of designs. In D. Forey and B. Kahin, editors, Advancing Knowledge and the Knowledge
Economy, pages 299–328, Cambridge, Mass., 2006b. MIT Press.
A. Banerjee, X. Guo, and H. Wang. On the optimality of conditional expectatio n as a Bregman
predictor. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(7):2664–2669, 2005a.
A. Banerjee, S. Merugu, I.S. Dhillon, and J. Ghosh. Clustering with Breg man divergences. The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6:1705–1749, 2005b.
V . Barnett.Comparative Statistical Inference. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 3rd edition, 1999.
803

REID AND WILLIAMSON
P.L. Bartlett, P.M. Long, and R.C. Williamson. Fat-shattering and the learnability o f real-valued
functions. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 52(3):434–452, 1996.
P.L. Bartlett, M.I. Jordan, and J.D. McAuliffe. Convexity, classiﬁcation, a nd risk bounds. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 101(473):138–156, March 2006.
G. Baudat and F. Anouar. Generalized discriminant analysis using a ker nel approach. Neural
Computation, 12(10):2385–2404, 2000.
H. H. Bauschke, R. Goebel, Y . Lucet, and X. Wang. The proximal aver age: Basic theory. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 19:766–785, 2008.
M.J. Bayarri and J.O. Berger. The interplay of Bayesian and frequentist analysis. Statistical Science,
19(1):58–80, 2004.
M. Ben-Bassat. epsilon-equivalence of feature selection rules. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 24(6):769–772, 1978.
S. Ben-David, J. Blitzer, K. Crammer, A. Kulesza, F. Pereira, and J. Wo rtman-Vaughan. A theory
of learning from different domains. Machine Learning, 79:151–175, 2010.
J.O. Berger. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis. Springer, New York, 1985.
J.O. Berger. Could Fisher, Jeffreys and Neyman have agreed on testing? Statistical Science, 18(1):
1–32, 2003.
I. Berlin. The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s view of History . Weidenfeld and
Nicolson, London, 1953.
A. Beygelzimer, V . Dani, T. Hayes, J. Langford, and B. Zadrozny. Error limiting reductions between
classiﬁcation tasks. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
Bonn, 2005.
A. Beygelzimer, J. Langford, and P. Ravikumar. Multiclass classiﬁcation with ﬁlter trees. Preprint,
June 2007. URL http://hunch.net/˜jl/projects/reductions/mc_to_b/invertedTree.
pdf.
A. Beygelzimer, J. Langford, and B. Zadrozny. Machine learning techniques — reductions between
prediction quality metrics. In Zhen Liu and Cathy H. Xia, editors, Performance Modeling and
Engineering, pages 3–28. Springer US, April 2008. URL http://hunch.net/˜jl/projects/
reductions/tutorial/paper/chapter.pdf.
P. Bickel and K. Doksum. Mathematical Statistics: Basic Ideas and Selected Topics , volume 1.
Prentice-Hall, 2nd edition, 2001.
A. Birnbaum. On the foundations of statistical inference: Binary experimen ts. The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 32(2):414–435, June 1961.
D. Blackwell. Comparison of experiments. In J. Neyman, editor, Proceedings of the Second Berke-
ley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1950 , pages 93–102, Berkeley and
Los Angeles, 31 July – 12 August 1951. University of California Press.
804

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
D. Blackwell. Equivalent comparisons of experiments. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 24
(2):265–272, 1953.
A. Blass and Y . Gurevich. Algorithms: A quest for absolute deﬁnitions. Bulletin of the European
Association for Theoretical Computer Science, 81:195–225, 2003.
A. Blass, N. Dershowitz, and Y . Gurevich. When are two algorithms the same ? Bull. Symbolic
Logic, 15(2):145–168, 2009.
F. Bolley and C. Villani. Weighted Csisz´ar-Kullback-Pinsker inequalities and applications to trans-
portation inequalities. Annales de la Faculte des Sciences de Toulouse, 14(3):331–352, 2005.
K.M. Borgwardt, A. Gretton, M.J. Rasch, H.P. Kriegel, B. Sch ¨olkopf, and A.J. Smola. Integrating
structured biological data by kernel maximum mean discrepancy. Bioinformatics, 22(14), 2006.
J.M. Borwein and A.S. Lewis. Duality relationships for entropy-like minimization problems. SIAM
Journal of Control and Optimization, 29(2):325–338, 1991.
O. Bousquet. Making machine learning more scientiﬁc. Blog Post., 2006. URL http://ml.
typepad.com/machine_learning_thoughts/2006/06/making_machine_.html.
G.C. Bowker. Memory practices in the sciences. MIT Press, 2005.
G.C. Bowker and S.L. Star. Sorting Things Out: Classiﬁcation and its Consequences . MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass., 1999.
L.M. Bregman. The relaxation method of ﬁnding the common point of convex se ts and its applica-
tion to the solution of problems in convex programming. USSR Computational Mathematics and
Mathematical Physics, 7(3):200–217, 1967.
M. Broniatowski. Minimum divergence in inference and testing. In Atti della XLII Riunione Scien-
tiﬁca, Universit`a di Bari, 2004. Societ`a Italiana Statistica.
M. Broniatowski and A. Keziou. Parametric estimation and tests through divergences and the duality
technique. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 100(1):16–36, 2009.
L.D. Brown and M.G. Low. Asymptotic equivalence of nonparametric regre ssion and white noise.
Annals of Statistics, 24(6):2384–2398, 1996.
L.D. Brown and L. Zhao. Direct asymptotic equivalence of nonparametricregression and the inﬁnite
dimensional location problem. Preprint, 2003. URL http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/
˜lzhao/papers/.
L.D. Brown, T.T. Cai, M.G. Low, and C.H. Zhang. Asymptotic equivalence theory for nonparamet-
ric regression with random design. Annals of Statistics, 30(3):688–707, 2002.
H.D. Brunk, G.M. Ewing, and W.R. Utz. Minimizing integrals in certain classes of monotone
functions. Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics, 7(1):833–847, 1957.
A. Buja, W. Stuetzle, and Y . Shen. Loss functions for binary class probability estimation and clas-
siﬁcation: Structure and applications. Technical report, University of P ennsylvania, November
2005.
805

REID AND WILLIAMSON
S. Canu and A. Smola. Kernel methods and the exponential family. Neurocomputing, 69(7-9):
714–720, 2006.
V .J. Carey, J. Mar, and R. Gentleman. MLInterfaces: Towards unifor m behaviour of machine
learning tools in R. Technical report, Harvard University, 2007.
A.V . Carter. Deﬁciency distance between multinomial and multivariate normal experiments. Annals
of Statistics, 30(3):708–730, 2002.
Y . Censor and S.A. Zenios. Parallel Optimization: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Oxford
University Press, 1997.
M. Cepedello-Boiso. On regularization in superreﬂexive Banach spac es by inﬁmal convolution
formulas. Studia Mathematica, 129(3):265–284, 1998.
P. Chaudhuri and W.Y . Loh. Nonparametric estimation of conditional quantiles using quantile re-
gression trees. Bernoulli, 8(5):561–576, 2002.
G. Choquet. Theory of capacities. Annales de l’institut Fourier, 5(54):131–295, 1953.
W.J. Conover and R.L. Iman. Rank transformations as a bridge between pa rametric and nonpara-
metric statistics. The American Statistician, 35(3):124–129, 1981.
C. Cortes and M. Mohri. AUC optimization vs. error rate minimization. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 16, 2004.
C. Cortes and V . Vapnik. Support-vector networks.Machine Learning, 20(3):273–297, 1995.
D. Cossock and T. Zhang. Subset ranking using regression. In G. L ugosi and H.U. Simon, editors,
Proceedings of Conference on Learning Theory (COLT) 2006, LNAI 4005, pages 605–619, 2006.
D. Crisan and A. Doucet. A survey of convergence results on particle ﬁ ltering methods for practi-
tioners. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,, 50(3):736–746, 2002.
D. J. Crisp and C. J. C. Burges. A geometric interpretation of ν-SVM classiﬁers. In S. A. Solla,
T. K. Leen, and K.-R. M ¨uller, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12 ,
pages 244–250. MIT Press, 2000.
I. Csisz´ar. Information-type measures of difference of probability distributions a nd indirect obser-
vations. Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica, 2:299–318, 1967.
I. Csisz´ar. Information measures: A critical survey. In Transactions of the Seventh Prague Con-
ference on Information Theory, Statistical Decision Functions, Random Processes, pages 73–86,
Dordrecht, 1978. D. Riedel.
I. Csisz´ar. Generalized projections for non-negative functions. Acta Mathematica Hungarica, 68
(1):161–186, March 1995.
A. Cuevas and R. Fraiman. A plug-in approach to support estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 25
(6):2300–2312, 1997.
806

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
A.P. Dawid. The geometry of proper scoring rules.Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics,
59(1):77–93, March 2007.
M.H. DeGroot. Uncertainty, information, and sequential experiments. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 33(2):404–419, 1962.
M.H. DeGroot. Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
L. Devroye, L. Gy¨orﬁ, and G. Lugosi. A Probabilistic Approach to Pattern Recognition. Springer,
New York, 1996.
P. Domingos. MetaCost: a general method for making classiﬁers cost-sens itive. In Proceedings
of the Fifth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 155–164, New York, NY , USA, 1999. ACM Press.
P. Domingos and M. Richardson. Markov logic: A unifying framework for statistical relational
learning. In Proceedings of the ICML-2004 Workshop on Statistical Relational Learning and its
Connections to Other Fields, pages 49–54, 2004.
S.S. Dragomir, V . Gluˇsˇcevi´c, and C.E.M. Pearce. Csisz ´ar f -divergence, Ostrowski’s inequality and
mutual information. Nonlinear Analysis, 47:2375–2386, 2001.
C. Drummond. Discriminative vs. generative classiﬁers for cost sensitiv e learning. In Proceedings
of the Nineteenth Canadian Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , LNAI 4013, pages 479–490,
Quebec, Canada, 2006.
C. Drummond and R.C. Holte. Cost curves: An improved method for visualizing classiﬁer perfor-
mance. Machine Learning, 65(1):95–130, 2006.
R. M. Dudley. Real Analysis and Probability. Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2003.
S. Eguchi. Information geometry and statistical pattern recognition. To appear in Sugaku Exposition,
American Mathematical Society, 2005.
S. Eguchi and J. Copas. Recent developments in discriminant analysis from an information geomet-
ric point of view. Journal of the Korean Statistical Society, 30:247–264, 2001.
T. Fawcett. ROC graphs: Notes and practical considerations for researchers. Machine Learning, 31,
2004.
T. Fawcett. ROC graphs with instance-varying costs. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(8):882–891,
2006.
U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth. Knowledge discovery a nd data mining: Towards
a unifying framework. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-96), pages 82–88. AAAI Press, 1996.
A.A. Fedotov, P. Harremo¨es, and F. Topsøe. Reﬁnements of Pinsker’s inequality.IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 49(6):1491–1498, June 2003.
807

REID AND WILLIAMSON
D. Feldman and F. ¨Osterreicher. A note on f -divergences. Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum
Hungarica, 24:191–200, 1989.
P.A. Flach. The geometry of ROC space: understanding machine learning metrics through ROC iso-
metrics. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’03),
pages 194–201, 2003.
P.A. Flach and S. Wu. Repairing concavities in ROC curves. In Proceedings of the International
Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-2005), page 702, 2005.
L. Floridi. Open problems in the philosophy of information.Metaphilosophy, 35(4):554–582, 2004.
F.G. Friedlander. Introduction to the Theory of Distributions. Cambridge University Press, 1982.
M.R. Garey and D.S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-
Completeness. WH Freeman & Co. New York, NY , USA, 1979.
J. K. Gershenson, G. J. Prasad, and Y . Zhang. Product modularity:deﬁnitions and beneﬁts. Journal
of Engineering Design, 14:295–313, 2003.
M. Ghallab, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, D. McDermott, A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld, and D. Wilkins.
PDDL speciﬁcation, 1998. AIPS-98 Planning Committee.
A.L. Gibbs and F.E. Su. On choosing and bounding probability metrics. International Statistical
Review, 70:419–435, 2002.
G. L. Gilardoni. On Pinsker’s type inequalities and Csisz ´ar’s f -divergences. part i: Second and
fourth-order inequalities. arXiv:cs/0603097v2, April 2006a.
G.L. Gilardoni. On the minimum f -divergence for a given total variation. Comptes Rendus
Acad´emie des sciences, Paris, Series 1, 343, 2006b.
G.L. Gilardoni. On the relationship between symmetric f -divergence and total variation and an
improved Vajda’s inequality. Preprint, Departamento de Estat ´ıstica, Universidade de Bras´ılia,
April 2006c. URLhttp://www.unb.br/ie/est/docentes/curriculo/gustavo_homepage/
artigos/improved.pdf.
T. Gneiting and A.E. Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, an d estimation. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, March 2007.
P.K. Goel and M.H. DeGroot. Comparison of Experiments and Information Measures. The Annals
of Statistics, 7(5):1066–1077, 1979.
P.K. Goel and J. Ginebra. When is one experiment ‘always better than’ a nother? Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society Series D (The Statistician), 52(4):515–537, 2003.
P.W. Goldberg. When can two unsupervised learners achieve PAC separation? Proceedings of the
14th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 303–319, 2001.
S.A. Goldman, R.L. Rivest, and R.E. Schapire. Learning binary relations a nd total orders. In
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 46–51,
1989.
808

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
J.D.J. Golic. On the relationship between the information measures and the Baye s probability of
error. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 33(5):681–693, 1987.
A. Gretton, K.M. Borgwardt, M. Rasch, B. Sch ¨olkopf, and A.J. Smola. A kernel method for the
two-sample-problem. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2008. submitted.
R.L. Grossman, M.F. Hornick, and G. Meyer. Data mining standards initiative s. Commun. ACM,
45(8):59–61, 2002. ISSN 0001-0782.
P.D. Gr¨unwald. The Minimum Description Length Principle. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2007.
P.D. Gr¨unwald and A.P. Dawid. Game theory, maximum entropy, minimum discrepancy and robust
bayesian decision theory. The Annals of Statistics, 32(4):1367–1433, 2004.
C. Gutenbrunner. On applications of the representation of f -divergences as averaged minimal
Bayesian risk. In Transactions of the 11th Prague Conference on Information Theory, Statistical
Decision Functions and Random Processes , pages 449–456, Dordrecht; Boston, 1990. Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
D.J. Hand. Deconstructing statistical questions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A
(Statistics in Society), 157(3):317–356, 1994.
D.J. Hand. Comment on “The skill-plot: A graphical technique for evaluatingcontinuous diagnostic
tests”. Biometrics, 63:259, 2008.
D.J. Hand and R.J. Till. A simple generalisation of the area under the ROC curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Machine Learning, 45(2):171–186, 2001.
D.J. Hand and V . Vinciotti. Local versus global models for classiﬁcation problems: Fitting models
where it matters. The American Statistician, 57(2):124–131, 2003.
J.A. Hanley and B.J. McNeil. The meaning and use of the area under a rece iver operating charac-
teristic (ROC) curve. Radiology, 143:29–36, 1982.
P. Harremo¨es. Time and Conditional Independence. Ph.d. thesis, Roskilde University, 1993. Orig-
inal in Danish entitled Tid og Betinget Uafhængighed. English translation partia lly available at
http://www.math.ku.dk/˜moes/index.html.
R. Herbrich. Learning Kernel Classiﬁers. MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2002.
H. Heyer. Theory of Statistical Experiments. Springer, 1982.
J.-B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemar ´echal. Convex Analysis and Minimization Algorithms: Part II:
Advanced Theory and Bundle Methods. Springer, Berlin, 1993a.
J.-B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemar ´echal. Convex Analysis and Minimization Algorithms: Part I:
Fundamentals. Springer, Berlin, 1993b.
J-B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemar´echal. Fundamentals of Convex Analysis. Springer, Berlin, 2001.
J.-B. Hiriart-Urruty and J.-E. Mart´ınez-Legaz. Convex solutions of a functional equation arising in
information theory. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 328:1309–1320, 2007.
809

REID AND WILLIAMSON
W. James. A Pluralistic Universe. Longmans, Green, and Co., London, 1909. Hibbert Lectures at
Manchester College on the Present Situation in Philosophy.
R. Jenssen. An information theoretic approach to machine learning. Doctor Scientiarum Thesis,
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Tromsø, 2005a.
R. Jenssen. An Information Theoretic Approach to Machine Learning. PhD thesis, Department of
Physics, University of Tromsø, Norway, May 2005b.
R. Jenssen, D. Erdogmus, J.C. Principe, and T. Eltoft. Towards a uniﬁc ation of information the-
oretic learning and kernel methods. In Proc. IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
Processing (MLSP2004), pages 93–102, 2004.
R. Jenssen, D. Erdogmus, J.C. Pr ´ıncipe, and T. Eltoft. Some equivalences between kernel meth-
ods and information theoretic methods. Journal of VLSI Signal Processing, 45(1):49–65, 2006.
(Paper 3 of Jenssen (2005a)).
D.S. Johnson. NP-Completeness Columns. Journal of Algorithms; ACM Transactions on Al-
gorithms, 2–13; 1–3, 1982–1992; 2005–2007. URL http://www.research.att.com/˜dsj/
columns/.
M.I. Jordan. Learning in Graphical Models. MIT Press, 1999.
T. Kailath. The divergence and Bhattacharyya distance measures in sign al selection. IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, 15(1):52–60, 1967.
A. Keziou. Dual representations of φ-divergences and applications. Comptes Rendus Acad´emie des
sciences, Paris, Series 1, 336:857–862, 2003a.
A. Keziou. Utilisation des Divergences entre Mesures en Statistique Inf ´erentielle. PhD thesis,
Universit´e Paris 6, 2003b.
M. Khosravifard, D. Fooladivanda, and T.A. Gulliver. Conﬂiction of the convexity and metric prop-
erties in f -divergences. IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communication
and Computer Sciences, E90-A(9):1848–1853, 2007.
J. Kiefer. The foundations of statistics — are there any? Synthese, 36:161–176, 1977.
J.C. Kiefer. Introduction to Statistical Inference. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987.
D.E. Knuth. Two notes on notation. American Mathematical Monthly, pages 403–422, 1992.
F.R. Kschischang, B.J. Frey, and H.A. Loeliger. Factor graphs and thesum-product algorithm. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 47(2):498–519, 2001.
S. Kullback. Lower bound for discrimination information in terms of variation. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 13:126–127, 1967. Correction, volume 16, p. 652, September 1970.
P. Kumar and S. Chhina. A symmetric information divergence measure of the Csisz´ar’sf -divergence
class and its bounds. Computers and Mathematics with Applications, 49:575–588, 2005.
810

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
N. Lambert, J. Langford, J. Wortman, Y . Chen, D. Reeves, Y . Shoham, and D. Pennock. Self-
ﬁnanced wagering mechanisms for forecasting. In Lance Fortnow, Joh n Riedl, and Tuomas
Sandholm, editors, Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce , pages 170–
179, 2008.
J. Langford. Machine learning reductions tutorial. Slides presented at th e Machine Learning Sum-
mer School, July 2006.
J. Langford. Alternative machine learning reductions deﬁnitions. Machin e Learning (Theory),
March 2007. URL http://hunch.net/?p=255.
J. Langford and A. Beygelzimer. Sensitive error correcting output codes. In Proceedings of the 18th
Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT-2005), pages 158–172. Springer, 2005.
J. Langford and B. Zadrozny. Estimating class membership probabilities usin g classiﬁer learners.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AIS-
TAT’05), 2005.
J. Langford, R. Oliveira, and B. Zadrozny. Predicting conditional qu antiles via reduction to classi-
ﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 22nd Conference in Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence . AUAI
Press, 2006.
J.A. Lasserre, C.M. Bishop, and T.P. Minka. Principled hybrids of gene rative and discriminative
models. In Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition – Volume 1, pages 87–94. IEEE Computer Society Washington, DC, USA,
2006.
L. LeCam. Sufﬁciency and Approximate Sufﬁciency. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35(4):
1419–1455, 1964.
L. LeCam. Asymptotic Methods in Statistical Decision Theory. Springer, 1986.
L. Li and H.-T. Lin. Ordinal regression by extended binary classiﬁcatio n. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 19, pages 865–873, 2007.
F. Liese and K.-J. Miescke. Statistical Decision Theory. Springer, New York, 2008.
F. Liese and I. Vajda. On divergences and informations in statistics and inf ormation theory. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 52(10):4394–4412, 2006.
D.V . Lindley. On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. The Annals of Mathe-
matical Statistics, 27(4):986–1005, 1956.
J. Lindstr ¨om. On the origin and early history of functional analysis. Technical Repo rt U.U.D.M.
Projrect Report 2008:1, Uppsala Universitet, January 2008.
J. Locke. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Thomas Basset, London, 1690.
P.M. Long and R.A. Servedio. Discriminative learning can succeed where generative learning
fails. In G. Lugosi and H.U. Simon, editors, Proceedings of the Conference on Learning Theory
(COLT), LNAI 4005, pages 319–334, Berlin, 2006. Springer-Verlag.
811

REID AND WILLIAMSON
P.M. Long, R.A. Servedio, and H.U. Simon. Discriminative learning can succeed where generative
learning fails. Preprint, correction to Long and Servedio (2006), November 2006.
R. Lutz and M. Musio. An alternative mathematical foundation for statistics. Acta Applicandae
Mathematicae: An International Survey Journal on Applying Mathematics and Mathematical
Applications, 89(1):217–249, 2005.
C. Lyell. Principles of Geology. John Murray, London, 1830.
R. A. Maxion and R. R. Roberts. Proper use of ROC curves in intrusion/a nomaly detection. Tech-
nical Report CS-TR-871, School of Computing Science, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
November 2004.
E. McDermott and S. Katagiri. A Parzen window based derivation of minimum c lassiﬁcation error
from the theoretical Bayes classiﬁcation risk. In Proceedings of International Conference on
Spoken Language Processing, pages 2465–2468, 2002.
E. McDermott and S. Katagiri. A new formalization of minimum classiﬁcation error using a Parzen
estimate of classiﬁcation chance. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, 2003. Paper 4406.
T. Minka. Discriminative models, not discriminative training. Technical Report MSR-TR-2005-144,
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, October 2005.
J. Mokyr. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. Oxford University
Press, USA, 1992.
N. Morse and R. Sacksteder. Statistical isomorphism. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 37(1):
203–214, 1966.
A. M ¨uller. Integral probability metrics and their generating classes of functions . Advances in
Applied Probability, 29:429–443, 1997a.
A. M¨uller. Stochastic orders generated by integrals: A uniﬁed study. Advances in Applied Proba-
bility, 29:414–428, 1997b.
E. Nelson. Radically Elementary Probability Theory. Princeton University Press, 1987.
J. Neyman and E. S. Pearson. On the problem of the most efﬁcient tests of statistical hypotheses.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, C ontaining Papers of a
Math. or Phys. Character (1896-1934) , 231:289–337, 1933. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1098/rsta.1933.0009.
A. Y . Ng and M.I. Jordan. On discriminative vs. generative classiﬁers: A comparison of logistic
regression and na ¨ıve Bayes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) ,
volume 15, 2002.
X. Nguyen, M.J. Wainwright, and M.I. Jordan. On distance measures, surrogate loss functions, and
distributed detection. Technical Report 695, Department of Statistics, Uni versity of California,
Berkeley, October 2005.
812

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
X. Nguyen, M.J. Wainwright, and M.I. Jordan. On surrogate loss functio ns and f -divergences.
Annals of Statistics, 37:876–904, 2009.
D. Noble. The Music of Life: Biology Beyond the Genome. Oxford University Press, 2006.
F. ¨Osterreicher. f -divergences — representation theorem and metrizability. Technical Rep ort, In-
stitute of Mathematics, University of Salzburg, September 2003.
F. ¨Osterreicher and D. Feldman. Divergenzen von Wahrscheinlichkeitsve rteilungen — Integralge-
ometrisch Betrachtet. Acta Mathematica Academaiae Scientiarum Hungarica , 37(4):329–337,
1981.
F. ¨Osterreicher and I. Vajda. Statistical information and discrimination. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 39(3):1036–1039, 1993.
N. Palmer and P.W. Goldberg. PAC classiﬁcation based on PAC estimates of label class distributions.
Arxiv preprint cs.LG/0607047, 2006.
A.R.C. Pavia, J.-.W Xu, and J.C. Pr ´ıncipe. Kernel principal components are maximum entropy
projections. In ICA 2006. Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3889 , pages 846–853,
2006.
R.R. Phelps. Lectures on Choquet’s Theorem , volume 1757 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics .
Springer, 2nd edition, 2001.
M.S. Pinsker. Information and Information Stability of Random Variables and Processes. Holden-
Day, 1964.
D. Pollard. Some thoughts on LeCam’s statistical decision theory. Preprint, S tatistics Depart-
ment, Yale University, May 2000. URL http://www.stat.yale.edu/˜pollard/Papers/
thoughts.pdf.
H. Vincent Poor and John B. Thomas. Applications of Ali-Silvey distance mea sures in the design
of generalized quantizers for binary decision systems. IEEE Transactions on Communications,
25(9):893–900, September 1977.
J.C. Principe, D. Xu, and J. Fisher. Information theoretic learning. In Simo n Haykin, editor, Un-
supervised Adaptive Filtering: Volume 1, Blind Source Seperation , pages 265–319, New York,
2000a. Wiley.
J.C. Principe, D. Xu, Q. Zhao, and J.W. Fisher III. Learning from exa mples with information
theoretic criteria. The Journal of VLSI Signal Processing, 26(1–2):61–77, 2000b.
S.T. Rachev. Probability metrics and the stability of stochastic models. Wiley series in probability
and mathematical statistics, Chichester, 1991.
S. Raudys. Statistical and Neural Classiﬁers: An Integrated Approach to Design, chapter Taxonomy
of Pattern Classiﬁcation Algorithms. Springer, London, 2001.
M.D. Reid and R.C. Williamson. Surrogate regret bounds for proper losse s. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 897–904, 2009.
813

REID AND WILLIAMSON
M.D. Reid and R.C. Williamson. Composite binary losses. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
11:2387–2422, 2010.
M. Richardson and P. Domingos. Markov logic networks.Machine Learning, 62(1):107–136, 2006.
J. Rissanen. Information and Complexity in Statistical Modelling. Springer, New York, 2007.
C.P. Robert. The Bayesian Choice: A Decision-Theoretic Motivation. Springer, New York, 1994.
R. T. Rockafellar. Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press, 1970.
R.T. Rockafellar and R.J-B. Wets. Variational Analysis. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004.
Y .D. Rubinstein and T. Hastie. Discriminative vs informative learning. In Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, pages 49–53. AAAI Press, 1997.
R. Sacksteder. A note on statistical equivalence. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 38(3):
787–794, 1967.
L.J. Savage. Elicitation of personal probabilities and expectations. Journal of the American Statis-
tical Association, 66(336):783–801, 1971.
A.H. Sayed and T. Kailath. A survey of spectral factorization methods. Numerical Linear Algebra
with Applications, 8(6-7):467–496, 2001.
M.J. Schervish. A general method for comparing probability assessors. The Annals of Statistics, 17
(4):1856–1879, 1989.
B. Sch¨olkopf and A.J. Smola. Learning with Kernels. MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2002.
B. Sch ¨olkopf, A. Smola, R. C. Williamson, and P. L. Bartlett. New support vector alg orithms.
Neural Computation, 12:1207–1245, 2000.
C. Scott. Calibrated surrogate losses for classiﬁcation with label-depende nt costs.
arXiv:1009:2718v1, September 2010.
C. Scott and M. Davenport. Regression level set estimation via cost-sens itive classiﬁcation. IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, 55(6 Part 1):2752–2757, 2007.
G. Shafer and V . V ovk.Probability and Finance: It’s Only a Game! J. Wiley & Sons, 2001.
C.E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27:379–
423; 623–656, 1948.
Y . Shen. Loss Functions for Binary Classiﬁcation and Class Probability Estimation . PhD thesis,
Department of Statistics, University of Pennsylvania, October 2005.
E. Shuford, A. Albert, and H.E. Massengill. Admissible probability measurement procedures. Psy-
chometrika, 31(2):125–145, June 1966.
L.N. Soldatova and R.D. King. An ontology of scientiﬁc experiments. Interface: The Journal of
The Royal Society, 3(11):795–803, 2006.
814

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
L. Song, M.D. Reid, A.J. Smola, and R.C. Williamson. Discriminative estimation of f -divergence.
Submitted to AISTATS09, October 2008.
B.K. Sriperumbudur, A. Gretton, K. Fukumizu, G. Lanckriet, and B. Sch¨olkopf. On integral proba-
bility metrics, φ-divergences and binary classiﬁcation. Arxiv preprint arXiv:0901 .2698v4, Octo-
ber 2009.
I. Steinwart. How to compare different loss functions and their risks. Pre print, Modeling, Algo-
rithms and Informatics Group, CCS-3, Los Alamos National Laboratory, September 2006.
I. Steinwart. How to compare different loss functions and their risks. Constructive Approximation,
26(2):225–287, August 2007.
I. Steinwart and A. Christmann. Support Vector Machines. Springer, New York, 2008.
I. Steinwart, D. Hush, and C. Scovel. Density level detection is classiﬁcatio n. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 17, 2005.
H. Strasser. Mathematical Theory of Statistics. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1985.
H. Strasser. Reduction of complexity. In Josef A. Mazanec and Helmut Str asser, editors, A Non-
parametric Approach to Perceptions-Based Market Segmentation: Fou ndations, pages 99–140,
Wien, 2000. Springer.
I.J. Taneja. Reﬁnement inequalities among symmetric divergence measures.
arXiv:math/0501303v2, April 2005a.
I.J. Taneja. Bounds on non-symmetric divergence measures in terms of symmetric divergence mea-
sures. arXiv:math.PR/0506256v1, 2005b.
D. Tasche. Conditional expectation as quantile derivative. Arxiv preprint math.PR/0104190, 2001.
W. B. Temple. Stieltjes integral representation of convex functions. Duke Mathematical Journal,
21:527–531, 1954.
N. Tishby, F.C. Pereira, and W. Bialek. The information bottleneck method. A rxiv preprint
physics/0004057, 2000.
S. Tong and D. Koller. Restricted Bayes optimal classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 17th National
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 658–664, 2000.
F. Topsøe. Some inequalities for information divergence and related measu res of discrimination.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 46(4):1602–1609, 2000.
F. Topsøe. Bounds for entropy and divergence for distributions over a two-element set. J. Ineq. Pure
& Appl. Math, 2(2), 2001.
F. Topsøe. Between truth and description. Presented at Prague Stochastics 2006, June 2006.
E.N. Torgersen. Measures of information based on comparison with total information and with total
ignorance. The Annals of Statistics, 9(3):638–657, 1981.
815

REID AND WILLIAMSON
E.N. Torgersen. Comparison of Statistical Experiments. Cambridge University Press, 1991.
G.T. Toussaint. Probability of error, expected divergence and the afﬁ nity of several distributions.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 8:482–485, 1978.
S. Turkle and S. Papert. Epistemological pluralism and the revaluation of the concrete. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 11(1):3–33, March 1992.
P. Turney. Types of cost in inductive concept learning. In Workshop on Cost-Sensitive Learning at
the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 15–21, 2000.
A. Unterreiter, A. Arnold, P. Markowich, and G. Toscani. On generalized Csisz´ar-Kullback inequal-
ities. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik, 131:235–253, 2000.
I. Vajda. Note on discrimination and variation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 16:
771–773, 1970.
A. van der Vaart. The statistical work of Lucien Le Cam.Annals of Statistics, 30(3):631–682, 2002.
V . Vapnik.Estimation of Dependences Based on Empirical Data. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2006.
2nd edition.
V . N. Vapnik. Inductive principles of the search for empirical dependences (methods based on weak
convergence of probability measures). In COLT ’89: Proceedings of the second annual work-
shop on computational learning theory , pages 3–21, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1989. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
H.R. Varian. Innovation, components and complements. University of California, Berkeley, October
2003. URL http://www.almaden.ibm.com/coevolution/pdf/varian_paper.pdf.
V . V ovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer.Algorithmic learning in a random world. Springer, 2005.
A. Wald. Statistical decision functions. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 20(2):165–205, June
1949.
A. Wald. Statistical Decision Functions. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1950.
M.L. Weitzman. Recombinant growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2):331–360, 1998.
D. Wettschereck and S. Muller. Exchanging data mining models with the predicti ve modelling
markup language. International Workshop on Integration and Collaboration Aspects of Data
Mining, Decision Support and Meta-Learning, 2001.
Wikipedia. Grothendieck’s relative point of view. Wikipedia, September 2007. URL http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Grothendieck’s_relative_point_of_view. Accessed 17/09/2007.
R. Winkler, J. Mu˜noz, J. Cervera, J. Bernardo, G. Blattenberger, J. Kadane, D. Lindley, A. Murphy,
R. Oliver, and D. R´ıos-Insua. Scoring rules and the evaluation of probabilities. TEST, 5(1):1–60,
March 1990.
L. Withers. Some inequalities relating different measures of divergence b etween two probability
distributions. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 45(5):1728–1735, 1999.
816

INFORMATION , DIVERGENCE AND RISK
A.P. Worthen and W.E. Stark. Uniﬁed design of iterative receivers using factor graphs. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 47(2):843–849, 2001.
J. Xie and C.E. Priebe. A weighted generalization of the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon statistic. Journal
of Statistical Planning and Inference, 102(2):441–466, 2002.
J.-W. Xu, D. Erdogmus, R. Jenssen, and J.C. Pr´ıncipe. An information-theoretic perspective to ker-
nel independent component analysis. In Proceedings of International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP’05), volume 5, pages 249–252, 2005.
G.L. Yang and L. Le Cam. A conversation with Lucien Le Cam.Statistical Science, 14(2):223–241,
1999.
B. Zadrozny, J. Langford, and N. Abe. Cost-sensitive learning by c ost-proportionate example
weighting. In Third IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, pages 435–442, 2003.
J. Zhang. Divergence function, duality, and convex analysis. Neural Computation, 16(1):159–195,
2004a.
J. Zhang and H. Matsuzoe. Dualistic riemannian manifold structure induced from convex functions.
Advances in Mechanics and Mathematics., 17:437–464, 2009.
T. Zhang. Statistical behaviour and consistency of classiﬁcation methods ba sed on convex risk
minimization. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 32:56–134, 2004b.
V .M. Zolotarev. Probability metrics. Theory of Probability and its Applications , 38(2):278–302,
1984.
817