1
QUADERNI
MONOGRAPHS

Alexander Holevo
Steklov Mathematical Institute
Moscow
Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory

Alexander Holevo
Probabilistic
and Statistical
Aspects of Quantum
Theory

c⃝2011 Scuola Normale Superiore Pisa
ISBN: 978-88-7642-375-8

Contents
ForewordtothesecondEnglishedition ix
PrefacetothesecondRussianedition xi
Preface xiii
1 Statisticalmodels 1
1.1 States and measurements ................. 1
1.2 Some facts about convex sets ............... 5
1.3 De/g192nition of a statistical model.............. 1 2
1.4 The classical statistical model .............. 1 3
1.5 Reduction of statistical model. Classical model with a
restricted class of measurements ............. 1 8
1.6 The statistical model of quantum mechanics ....... 2 3
1.7 On the problem of “hidden variables” .......... 2 9
1.8 Comments ......................... 3 4
2 Mathematicsofquantumtheory 37
2.1 Operators in a Hilbert space ............... 3 7
2.2 Quantum states and measurements ............ 4 3
2.3 Spectral representation of bounded operators ....... 4 5
2.4 Spectral representation of unbounded operators ..... 4 9
2.5 On realization of measurement .............. 5 5
2.6 Uncertainty relations and compatibility .......... 5 9
2.7 Trace-class operators and Hilbert-Schmidt operators . . . 63
2.8
L 2 spaces associated with a quantum state ....... 6 9
2.9 Uncertainty relations for measurements with /g192nite sec-
ond moments ....................... 7 4
2.10 Matrix representation of square-summable operators. The
commutation operator of a state ............. 7 7
2.11 Comments ......................... 8 1

vi Alexander Holevo
3 Symmetrygroupsinquantummechanics 85
3.1 Statistical model and Galilean relativity ......... 8 5
3.2 One-parameter shift groups and uncertainty relations . . 89
3.3 Kinematics of a quantum particle in one dimension . . . 93
3.4 Uniqueness theorem. The Schr ¨odinger and the
momentum representations ................ 9 7
3.5 Minimum-uncertainty states. The completeness relation . 100
3.6 Joint measurements of coordinate and velocity ...... 1 0 3
3.7 Dynamics of a quantum particle in one dimension .... 1 0 8
3.8 Time observable. The “time-energy” uncertainty relation 112
3.9 Quantum oscillator and phase measurement ....... 1 1 7
3.10 The coherent-state representation ............. 1 2 2
3.11 Representations of the rotation group and angular momenta128
3.12 Measuring the angle of rotation .............. 1 3 3
3.13 Comments ......................... 1 3 6
4 Covariantmeasurementsandoptimality 141
4.1 Parametric symmetry groups and covariant measurements 141
4.2 Structure of covariant measurements ........... 1 4 4
4.3 The covariant quantum estimation problem ....... 1 4 6
4.4 Measurements of angular parameters ........... 1 5 1
4.5 Uncertainty relations for angular quantities ....... 1 5 4
4.6 Covariant measurements of angular parameter in the case
of arbitrary representation of the group T ........ 1 5 8
4.7 Covariant measurements of a shift parameter ....... 1 6 2
4.8 The case of irreducible representation .......... 1 6 9
4.9 Estimation of pure state .................. 1 7 4
4.10 Measuring parameters of orientation ........... 1 7 8
4.11 Comments ......................... 1 8 2
5 Gaussianstates 187
5.1 Quasiclassical states of the quantum oscillator ...... 1 8 7
5.2 The CCR for many degrees of freedom .......... 1 9 0
5.3 Proof of the Stone-von Neumann uniqueness theorem.
The Weyl transform .................... 1 9 4
5.4 Characteristic function and moments of state ....... 2 0 1
5.5 Structure of general Gaussian states ........... 2 0 8
5.6 A characteristic property of Gaussian states ....... 2 1 3
5.7 Comments ......................... 2 1 7

vii Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
6 Unbiasedmeasurements 219
6.1 Quantum communication channel ............ 2 1 9
6.2 A lower bound for the variance in one-dimensional case . 221
6.3 The case of shift parameter ................ 2 2 6
6.4 Estimation of force by measurements over a trial object . 232
6.5 A bound for the measurement covariance matrix based
on symmetric logarithmic derivatives ........... 2 3 6
6.6 A bound based on right logarithmic derivatives ..... 2 3 9
6.7 A general bound for the total mean-square deviation . . . 246
6.8 Linear measurements ................... 2 5 2
6.9 Mean-value estimation for Gaussian states ........ 2 5 7
6.10 Comments ......................... 2 6 1
Supplement
Statisticalstructureofquantumtheoryandhiddenvariables265
1 Introduction ........................ 2 6 5
2 The structure of statistical theories ............ 2 6 9
2.1 Axiomatic approaches in quantum mechanics . . 269
2.2 The classical picture of statistical experiment . . 270
2.3 The main features of statistical description . . . 274
2.4 Statistical model of quantum mechanics ..... 2 7 6
2.5 Compatibility and complementarity ....... 2 7 9
2.6 Classical and nonclassical models ........ 2 8 2
3 The problem of hidden variables ............. 2 8 3
3.1 “No-go” proofs and the minimal statistical
requirements on hidden variables ........ 2 8 3
3.2 A hidden variable model for a single quantum
system ...................... 2 9 1
3.3 Hidden variables and evolutions of quantum system293
3.4 Composite systems, EPR paradox and the Bell
inequality ..................... 2 9 8
References 305



Foreword to the second English edition
In the present edition the comments to chapters in the main text and
the References were extended and updated. During the past years the
quantum (noncommutative) generalizations of probability, mathemati-
cal statistics and information theory were substantially developed. The-
ory of quantum stochastic processes was elaborated, unifying repeated
and continuous measurement with the dynamics of open quantum sys-
tems. This material is re/g193ected in the book [178] where the reader can
/g192nd an extended bibliography. With the emergence of ideas of quantum
computation the powerful impetus got the quantum information theory
which was born more than half-century ago and shaped as an indepen-
dent scienti/g192c discipline in the 1990-s. This progress enhanced, in partic-
ular, recent development of asymptotic methods of quantum estimation
theory. An introduction to this circle of problems can be found in the
books [152, 170, 179].
The present edition would not be possible without the enthusiasm and
perseverance of Professor Vittorio Giovannetti and Professor Rosario Fazio
to whom the author expresses his warm gratitude. The author is grateful
to Dottoressa Luisa Ferrini, Edizioni della Normale, for her professional
and most ef/g192cient assistance in preparation of the manuscript.
This book is dedicated to the memory of Academician Kamil A. Valiev
who passed away in the summer 2010.
Alexander Holevo
Moscow, September 2010.



Foreword to the second Russian edition
When this book was /g192rst published in 1980 (the English edition appeared
in 1982 in North Holland), the author addressed it to a broad audience
of readers, both mathematicians and physicists having intention to make
them acquainted with the new prospects and possibilities which emerge
from the interaction of ideas of the mathematical statistics and the quan-
tum theory. During the past period this approach became even more de-
manded. On one side, its advantages in the questions of foundations
of quantum theory related to quantum measurements became more ap-
parent and widely acknowledged. On the other hand, one should stress
that these theoretical /g192ndings were not an end in itself: in modern high-
precision physical experiments researchers become able to operate with
single ions, atoms and photons which leads to potentially important ap-
plications, such as quantum communications, computation and cryptog-
raphy. Of great importance is the question of extraction of maximal possi-
ble information from the state of a given quantum system. For example,
in currently discussed proposals for quantum computing information is
written in the states of elementary quantum memory cells, qubits, and
then read off by means of quantum measurement. From the statistical
point of view, measurement gives an estimate for the quantum state – as a
whole, or for some of its parameters. In this way a new interest emerges
to quantum estimation theory, the fundamentals of which are presented
in this book.
One of essential consequences of penetration of the ideas of mathe-
matical statistics into the theory of quantum measurement is the wide use
of the mathematical notion of (non-orthogonal) resolution of the iden-
tity in the system Hilbert space (in the Western literature – POVM, pos-
itive operator-valued measures), describing the statistics of decision pro-
cedures. During the time passed resolutions of the identity became a
standard tool both in mathematical and in physical literature on quantum
measurements. All this, in my opinion, justi/g192es publication of the sec-
ond Russian edition of the book, moreover as the /g192rst one became a rare
book.

xii Alexander Holevo
The present edition includes Supplement discussing in some detail the
problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics which continues to
provoke a keen interest. Moreover, the edition is complemented with
Comments re/g193ecting new results and achievements.
Academician K. A. Valiev
Moscow, April 2003.

Preface
The mathematical language of modern quantum mechanics is operator
theory. Operators play there a role similar to functions in classical me-
chanics, probability theory and statistics. However, while the use of func-
tions in classical theories is founded on premises which seem intuitively
quite clear, in quantum theory the situation with operators is different.
Historically the “matrix mechanics” of Heisenberg and the “wave
mechanics” of Schr ¨odinger which gave rise to the contemporary form
of quantum theory, originated from ingenious attempts to /g192t mathemat-
ical objects able to re/g193ect some unusual (from the macroscopic point
of view) features of microparticle behavior – in particular, a peculiar
combination of continuous and discrete properties. The “probabilistic
interpretation” developed later by Born and others elucidated the mean-
ing of operator formalism by postulating rules connecting mathematical
objects with observable quantities. However a good deal of arbitrari-
ness remained in these postulates and the most convincing argument for
quantum-theoretical explanations was still the “striking” coincidence of
theoretical predictions with experimental data. This state of affairs gave
rise to numerous attempts, on one hand, to /g192nd classical alternatives to
quantum theory which would give an equally satisfactory description of
the experimental data, and on the other hand, to /g192nd out physical and
philosophical arguments for justifying the inevitability of the new me-
chanics.
Notwithstanding the impressive philosophical achievements in this
/g192eld there was and still is a need for the structural investigation of quan-
tum theory from a more mathematical point of view aimed at elucidating
the connections between the entities of the physical world and the ele-
ments of operator formalism. The present book is essentially in this line
of research opened by the classical von Neumann’s treatise “Mathemati-
cal Foundations of Quantum Mechanics”. However it differs from most
subsequent investigations by the strong emphasis on the statistical rather
than “logical” essence of quantum theory; it gives an account of recent

xiv Alexander Holevo
progress in the statistical theory of quantum measurement, stimulated by
the new applications of quantum mechanics, particularly in quantum op-
tics.
The /g192rst three chapters give an introduction to the foundations of quan-
tum mechanics, addressed to the reader interested in the structure of
quantum theory and its relations with classical probability. In spite of
the mathematical character of the presentation it is not “axiomatic”. Its
purpose is to display the origin of the basic elements of operator formal-
ism resting, as far as possible, upon the classical probabilistic concepts.
The present revision is not an end in itself – it emerged from the so-
lution of concrete problems concerning the quantum limitations to mea-
surement accuracy, arising in applications. So far there has been no gen-
eral approach to such kind of problems. The methods of mathemati-
cal statistics adapted for classical measurements required radial quantum
modi/g192cation. The last chapters of the book are devoted to the recently
developed quantum estimation theory, which is an analog of the corre-
sponding branch of mathematical statistics.
We now give a more detailed account of the contents of the book. In
Chapter 1 the general concepts of state and measurement are introduced
on the basis of statistical analysis of an experimental situation. From the
very beginning this approach leads to a substantial generalization of the
Dirac-von Neumann concept of an observable. Mathematically it is re-
/g193ected by the occurrence of arbitrary resolutions of identity in place of or-
thogonal ones (spectral measures) and the repudiation of self-adjointness
as an indispensable attribute of an observable. In this way nonorthog-
onal resolutions of identity like the “overcomplete” system of coherent
states known in physics for rather a long time /g192nd their proper place in
quantum phenomenology. The new concept of quantum measurement is
central for the whole book.
The notion of statistical model exploited in Chapter 1 is quite general
and may /g192nd applications different from quantum theory. It gives us a
new insight into the still controversial “hidden variables” problem.
In Chapter 2 the elements of operator theory in Hilbert space are intro-
duced to provide mathematical background for the subsequent material.
As compared to standard presentations relatively much attention is paid
to nonorthogonal resolutions of identity and related questions. A novel
feature is also the introduction of the
L 2 spaces of observables associ-
ated with a quantum state and playing a role similar to the Hilbert space of
random variables with /g192nite second moment in probability theory. These
L 2 spaces give the framework for a calculus of unbounded operators.
Of fundamental importance to quantum theory are groups of symme-
tries. In Chapter 3 elementary quantum mechanics is considered from this

xv Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
point of view. An important result of this discussion is the isolation of the
notion of covariant measurement which ties physical quantities with cer-
tain classes of resolutions of identity in the underlying Hilbert space. In
this way we construct quantum measurements canonically corresponding
to such quantities as time, phase of harmonic oscillator, angle of rotation
and joint measurement of coordinate and velocity. Allowing the broader
concept of quantum measurement enables us to resolve old troubles of
quantum theory connected with the non-existence of self-adjoint opera-
tors having the required covariance properties.
Chapter 4 is devoted to a more advanced study of covariant measure-
ments and extreme quantum limits for the accuracy of estimation of phys-
ical parameters. The latter problem becomes important in view of the
progress in experimental physics. We present a uni/g192ed statistical ap-
proach to “non-standard” uncertainty relations of the “angle-angular mo-
mentum” type. They appear to be related to the quantum analog of
the Hunt-Stein theorem in mathematical statistics. A general conclusion
which can be drawn from Chapter 4 is that the requirements of covariance
and optimality, i.e., extremal quantum accuracy, determine the canoni-
cal measurement of a “shift” parameter, such as angle, coordinate, time,
uniquely up to a “gauge” transformation.
An example of a situation where quantum limitations are important is
provided by optical communication. As it is known, “quantum noise” dis-
torting the signal in the optical range can be much more signi/g192cant than
the thermal background radiation. As in ordinary communication theory
the problem of signal estimation arises, but now it requires a speci/g192cally
quantum-theoretic formulation and solution.
Chapter 5 is devoted to the so-called Gaussian states which, in par-
ticular, describe radiation /g192elds in optical communication theory. The
presentation is intended to make maximal use of the remarkable parallel
with the Gaussian probability distributions. An important role is played
here by quantum characteristic functions.
In Chapter 6 the general inequalities for the measurement mean square
errors are derived, which are quantum analogs of the well-known Cramer-
Rao inequality in mathematical statistics. The best unbiased measure-
ments of the mean-value parameters of a Gaussian state are describ-
ed.
Needless to say, the present book cannot (and is not intended to) re-
place the standard textbooks on quantum mechanics. Most of the impor-
tant topics, such as perturbation theory, are apparently out of its scope.
Nor does it pretend to give a full account of quantum measurements. We
have discussed only those problems which concern measurement statis-
tics and do not require consideration of state changes after measurements.

xvi Alexander Holevo
The references to the relevant work on “open” quantum systems and
quantum stochastic processes can be found in the comments.
The author’s intention was to write a book accessible to a wide circle
of readers, both mathematicians and physicists. As a result, the presenta-
tion, being in general mathematical, is rather informal and certainly not
“the most economic” from a mathematical point of view. On the other
hand, it neglects some subtleties concerning measurability etc. As a rule
a rigorous treatment can be found in the special papers refered to. The
necessary background for the whole material is knowledge of fundamen-
tals of probability theory. Mathematically the most elementary is Chapter
1 which uses mainly /g192nite-dimensional linear analysis. The functional
analytic minimum is given in Section 2.1-2.6 of Chapter 2, and a math-
ematically educated reader may just glance over it. On the other hand, a
reader familiar with quantum mechanics can omit the detailed discussion
of such topics as harmonic oscillators and spin in Chapter 3, included
to make the presentation self-contained, and concentrate on less familiar
things.
The Dirac notation is used intensively throughout the book but with
round brackets for the inner product as accepted in mathematical litera-
ture. The angle brackets, associated with the averaging symbol in statis-
tical mechanics, are reserved for the different inner product de/g192ning the
correlation of a pair of observables. To denote a quantum state as well
as its density operator we use the letter S (not the usual ρ) allied to the
notation P for the classical state (probability distribution).
The author’s thanks are due to Prof. D. P. /g225Zelobenko and the late Prof.
Yu. M. Shirokov who read the manuscript and made useful comments.
In translating the book the author took the opportunity of improving
the presentation which concerned mainly Chapters 3, 4. Few references
were added. The author is grateful to Prof. Yu. A. Rozanov and Prof.
P. R. Krishnaiah for providing the opportunity of translating this book for
North-Holland Series in Statistics and Probability.



Chapter 1
Statistical models
1.1. Statesandmeasurements
Any theoretical model ultimately relies upon experience – the framework
for a model is constituted by the array of experimental data relevant to
the study of the object or phenomenon. Let us consider a very schematic
and general description of an experimental situation and try to trace back
the emergence of the principal components of a theoretical model.
The fundamental reproducibility condition requires at least in principle
the unrestricted possibility of repetition of an experiment. Considering a
sequence of identical and independent realizations of some experimen-
tal situation one always sees that practically the data obtained are not
identically the same but subject to random /g193uctuations, the magnitude of
which depends on the nature of the experiment and of the object under
investigation.
There exist large classes of phenomena, for example, planetary motion
or constant electric currents, in which these random /g193uctuations can be
both practically and theoretically ignored. The corresponding theories –
classical celestial mechanics and circuit theory – proceed from the as-
sumption that the parameters describing the object can be measured with
arbitrary accuracy, or, ultimately, with absolute precision. In such cases
the object is said to admit deterministic description. Such a description,
however self-contained it seems to be, is usually only an approximation
to reality, valid in so far as it agrees with the experience.
The fruitfulness of the deterministic point of view in the classical phy-
sics of the 18-19
th centuries gave rise to the illusion of its universality.
However, with the penetration of experimental physics into the atomic
domain the inapplicability of the classical deterministic approach and the
relevance of statistical concepts in this domain became more and more
evident. The behavior of atomic and subatomic objects is essentially
probabilistic; an ordinary way to extract information about them is to
observe a large number of identical objects to obtain statistical data. The

2 Alexander Holevo
interested reader can /g192nd about the experimental evidence for statisti-
cal description in microphysics, which is now generally accepted, in any
contemporary tract on quantum physics.
The possibility of statistical description presumes the ful/g192lment of the
following statistical postulate, incorporating the previous requirement of
reproducibility: the individual results in a sequence of identical, indepen-
dent realizations of an experiment may vary, but the occurrence of one or
another result in a long enough sequence of realizations can be charac-
terized by a de/g192nite stable frequency. Then, abstracting from the practi-
cal impossibility of performing an in/g192nite sequence of realizations, one
can adopt that the results of the experiment are theoretically described by
the probabilities of various possible outcomes. More precisely, we must
distinguish an individual realization of the experiment which results in
some concrete outcome from the experiment as a collection of all its pos-
sible individual realizations. In this latter sense, the /g192nal results of the
experiment are theoretically described by probability distributions. The
deterministic dependence of the experimental results on the initial condi-
tions is replaced by the statistical one: the function of the initial data is
now the output probability distribution.
As an example consider a beam of identical independent particles
which are scattered by an obstacle and then registered by a photographic
plate, so that an individual particle hitting the plate causes a blackening
of the emulsion at the place of the collision. Exposing a beam which con-
sists of a large enough number of particles will result in a photographic
picture giving the visual image of the probability density for the point at
which an individual particle hits the plate. The natural light is the chaotic
/g193ow of an immense number of speci/g192c corpuscules – the photons. The
well-known optical diffraction pictures present the images of the proba-
bility density of an individual photon scattered by an aperture.
Of course, the statistical description is by no means subject to atomic
or subatomic phenomena. When investigating a system which consists
of a large number of components ( e.g., a gas or a liquid) the experi-
menter has at his disposal only a very restricted set of parameters to vary
(say, pressure, volume or temperature). An immense number of param-
eters, giving a detailed description for the behavior of subsystems of the
system are out of control; their uncontrolled changes may substantially
in/g193uence the results of measurements. A study of these /g193uctuations is
essential for understanding the mechanisms of phenomena occurring in
large systems. The statistics of observations is most important in prob-
lems of information transmission, where the /g193uctuations in the physical
carriers of information are the source of various “noises” distorting the
signal.

3 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The statistical approach is often appropriate in biometrical research. In
studying the effect of a medicine, a physician can take into account a lim-
ited number of parameters characterizing his patients such as age, blood
group etc. However the effect of the treatment in each individual case will
depend not only on these “integral” parameters, but also on a number of
other internal factors which were not, or could not be taken into account.
In such cases the dependence of the effect on the “input parameters” is
not deterministic and often can be successfully described statistically.
These two examples show that the origin of /g193uctuations in results of
measurement may be uncertainty in the values of some “hidden vari-
ables” which are beyond the control of the experimenter. The nature
of randomness in atomic and subatomic phenomena is still not so clear,
though the relevance of the statistical approach is con/g192rmed here by more
than half a century experience of applications of quantum theory. We
shall not touch here the issues concerning the nature of randomness in
microscopic phenomena, but we shall comment on some mathematical
aspects of the relevant “problem of hidden variables” in the Supplement.
The main attention we shall pay here to the consequences of the statistical
postulate irrespective of the nature of the object under consideration. We
shall see that already on this very general level the notions of the state and
the measurement arise, which play a basic role, in particular, in quantum
theory.
In any experiment one can distinguish the two main stages. At the
/g192rst stage ofpreparation a de/g192nite experimental set-up is settled, some
initial conditions or “input data” of the experiment are established. At the
following stage of the experiment the “prepared” object is coupled to a
measuring device, resulting in these or the other output data (Figure 1.1).
Conventionally, one may conceive the object as a “black box” at the “in-
put” of which one can impose some initial conditions˜S. After the object
has been de/g192nitely prepared, some measurement is performed, resulting
in the output data u. These data may be of arbitrary nature; they may be


4 Alexander Holevo
discrete if the measuring device registers the occurrence of some events,
e.g., the presence or absence of some particles; they may be represented
by a scalar or vector quantity, if the measuring device has one or several
scales; at last the result of a measurement may be a picture of a whole
trajectory, as in a bubble chamber. To give a uniform treatment for all
these possibilities we assume that the outcomes of measurement form a
measurable space U with the σ -/g192eld of measurable subsets
A (U).I n
the concrete cases we shall deal with, U will be usually a domain in the
real n-dimensional space Rn with the Borel σ -/g192eld generated by open
sets (or by multi-dimensional intervals). A measurable subset B ⊂ U
corresponds to the event: the result of the measurement u lies in B.
According to the statistical postulate, a result of an individual mea-
surement can be considered as a realization of a random variable taking
values in U. Let μ
˜S(du) be the probability distribution of this random
variable. The subscript ˜S re/g193ects the dependence of the statistics of the
measurement upon the preparation procedure, i.e., the initial conditions
of the experiment, so that
μ˜S(B)= Pr{u∈ B|˜S}, B∈ A (U)
is the conditional probability of obtaining a result u∈ B under the initial
condition˜S. The map ˜S→ μ˜S(du) gives a complete statistical descrip-
tion for the results of the measurement. It should be stressed, however,
that such a description does not contain indications either on a concrete
mechanism of the measurement, or on its consequences for the object.
From this point of view one should not distinguish between the measur-
ing procedures giving the same statistics μ
˜S under the same condition ˜S
however different their practical implementation may be. Thus the map
˜S→ μ˜S refers to this whole class of measuring procedures.
Similarly the initial conditions ˜S1 and ˜S2 are indiscernible from the
point of view of the results of measurements if μ˜S1 = μ˜S2 for any map
˜S → μ˜S describing a measurement. We shall join the indiscernible
preparation procedures ˜S in the equivalence classes S =[ ˜S] which will
be called states. Denote by S the set of all possible states. Since the
probability distribution μ˜S is the same for all ˜S from the class S,i ti sa
function of classes, μ˜S = μS. The map S → μS transforming states
S∈ S into the probability distributions on the space of outcomes U will
be called a measurement (with values in U).
The set S and the maps S → μS enjoy an important structural prop-
erty. Let {Sα} be a /g192nite collection of states. Consider an in/g192nite se-
quence of individual experiments in each of which the object is prepared
in some of the states S
α, the occurrence of different values of α being

5 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
characterized by a probability distribution {pα}. This may re/g193ect /g193uc-
tuations in the values of some parameters in the preparation procedure.
Let one and the same measurement be performed in each individual ex-
periment. Then by the statistical postulate and the elementary properties
of probabilities the occurrence of an outcome u will be described by the
probability distributionμ(du)= ∑
α pαμSα (du). The situation described
above can be considered as a special way of state preparation (mixing)
when the value of the parameter α is not /g192xed but is chosen according to
the prior distribution{p
α}. Denoting such “mixed” state by
S= S({Sα},{pα}) (1.1.1)
we have for any measurement S→ μS
μS(du)=
∑
a
pαμSα (du). (1.1.2)
Thus, we are led to adopt that for any /g192nite set of states{Sα}⊂S and
any probability distribution{pα} there is uniquely de/g192ned “mixed” state
S({Sα},{pα}), which is characterized by (1.1.2). Then it turns out that
the set of the states can be naturally identi/g192ed with a convex set in a
linear space, such that S({S
α},{pα})= ∑
α pα Sα. The exact formulation
requires some knowledge in convexity presented in the next section.
1.2. Somefactsaboutconvexsets
Let S1,..., Sn be the elements of a linear space L, and p1,..., pn as e t
of real numbers satisfying
pj ≥ 0, j= 1,...,n ;
n∑
j=1
pj = 1,
i.e., a /g192nite probability distribution. Then the element
S=
n∑
j=1
pj Sj
is called a convex combination of Sj with the coef/g192cients (weights){pj}.
The convex hull of a set K ⊂ L is the collection of all convex com-
binations of all /g192nite subsets{Sj}⊂ K. A set S is called convex if it
coincides with its convex hull, i.e., if it contains convex combination of
any /g192nite subset of its elements. For two elementsS0, S1, their convex
combinations form the segment[S0, S1]:
{S: S= p0 S0+ p1 S1; p0, p1 ≥ 0, p0+ p1 = 1}.

6 Alexander Holevo
It is easy to see that the set S is convex if and only if together with any
two elements S0, S1, it contains the segment[S0, S1].
An abstract set S is called mixture space if there is a rule by which
to any /g192nite unordered collection{Sα} of elements of S and any /g192nite
probability distribution{pα} there corresponds a unique element S({Sα},
{pα})∈ S called the mixture of the states Sα with weights pα. It is as-
sumed that mixing the collection consisting of copies of one and the same
element S
0 gives again S0, i.e.,i f Sα ≡ S0 for all α, then S({Sα},{pα})=
S0. An example of mixture space is a convex set with the convex combi-
nation as the mixture.
Let F be a map from a mixture space S into a linear space. The map
is called af/g192neif for any mixture S({Sα},{pα})
F(S({Sα},{pα}))=
∑
α
pα F(Sα).
The set of af/g192ne maps is nonempty, since the map which sends anyS∈ S
into a constant vector b is af/g192ne. Clearly, the image of a convex set under
an af/g192ne map is again convex. In linear space there is a close connection
between af/g192ne and linear maps: namely, any af/g192ne mapF of a convex set
S⊂
L has the form F(T)= A(T)+b, T ∈ S, where A is a linear map
de/g192ned onL. In particular, any af/g192ne functional (i.e., map with values
on the real line R) is up to an additive constant a restriction to S of a
linear functional on L.
A mixture space is called separated if for any two S1, S2 ∈ S there is
an af/g192ne functionalϕ on S such that ϕ(S1)̸=ϕ(S2).
An example of a separated mixture space is the set of states of Sec-
tion 1.1. Indeed, for any measurement S → μS and any subset B ∈
A (U) the functional S → μS(B) is af/g192ne by (1.1.2). By construction,
for any two states S1 and S2 there exists a measurement S → μS such
that μS1 ̸≡μS2 , i.e., μs1 (B)̸=μS2 (B) for some B. The following sim-
ple statement shows that the set of states can be considered as a convex
subset in a linear space, with the convex combinations as mixtures.
Proposition1.2.1. For any separated mixture spaceS there is a one-to-
one af/g192ne map ofS onto a convex subset of a linear space.
Proof. Let A(S) be the linear space of all af/g192ne functional onS and
L = A(S)′the dual space of all linear functionals on A(S). For each
S∈ S introduceˆS∈ L, putting
ˆS(ϕ)= ϕ(S), ϕ ∈ L.

7 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The map S→ˆS is af/g192ne, since
∑
j
pjˆSj(ϕ)=
∑
j
pj ϕ(Sj)= ϕ(S({Sj},{pj}))
=ˆS({Sj},{pj})(ϕ),
and it is one-to-one since ˆS1(ϕ) = ˆS2(ϕ) implies ϕ(S1)= ϕ(S2) for all
af/g192ne functionalsϕ. This proves the proposition.
The most simple example of a convex set in ann-dimensional simplex,
which is de/g192ned as a convex hull ofn+ 1 points S0,..., Sn in a space
of dimension≥ n, such that vectors S0 S1,..., S0 Sn are linearly indepen-
dent. For n = 1 this is a segment, for n = 2 a triangle, for n = 3a
tetrahedron (Figure 1.2). The points S0,..., Sn are the vertices of the
simplex.
The basic role in the theory of convex sets plays the notion of extreme
point. The point S is an extreme point of a convex set S,i fi ti sn o ta n
interior point of a segment, lying completely in S; that is, it cannot be
represented in the formS= p
0 S0+ p1 S1, where p0, p1 > 0, p0+ p1 = 1;
S0, S1 ∈ S and S0 ̸=S1. For example, the extreme points of a simplex are
its vertices. In a /g192nite-dimensional space the following statement holds.
Theorem1.2.2. Any compact (i.e., bounded and closed) set S coincides
with the convex hull of the set of its extreme points.
In general, there may be several ways to represent a pointS of a convex
set S as a convex combination of extreme points. The representation is
unique for any point S∈ S if and only if S is a simplex.
Theorem 1.2.2, the de/g192nition and the characteristic property of a sim-
plex can be generalized also to the in/g192nite-dimensional case, but a care-
ful treatment of these problems would require much more space; on the
other hand, the /g192nite-dimensional picture presented above will suf/g192ce for


8 Alexander Holevo
understanding the following sections. Therefore we consider only one
in/g192nite-dimensional example, which we shall substantially need later.
Let P(/Omega1)be the collection of all probability distributions on a mea-
surable space /Omega1. This set is convex, since any “mixture” of probability
distributions P
j(dω) is again a probability distribution on /Omega1
P(A)=
∑
j
pj Pj(A), A∈ A (/Omega1).
To any point ω∈ /Omega1there corresponds the δ-distribution, concentrated at
ω,
δω(A)=
{
1, A∋ω,
0, A̸∋ω.
We shall suppose, without loss of generality, that the σ -/g192eldA (/Omega1)sep-
arates points of /Omega1,i.e., for any two ω1, ω2 ∈ /Omega1there is A∈ A (/Omega1)such
that ω1 ∈ A; ω2 /∈ A. Then the correspondence ω→ δω is one-to-one.
The δ-distributions are precisely the extreme points of P(/Omega1). For any
P∈ P(/Omega1)
P(A)=
∫
/Omega1
δω(A)P(dω), A∈ A (/Omega1). (1.2.3)
This representation is a continual analog of a /g192nite convex combination
with respect to extreme points, the role of weights p
j is played by the
probability distribution P(dω). The representation (1.2.3) is unique; so
that the convex set P(/Omega1)has the property, characteristic of a simplex in
the /g192nite-dimensional case, and we shall keep this name forP(/Omega1).
If the space/Omega1consists of n points, /Omega1= /Omega1n (A (/Omega1n) being the Boolean
/g192eld of subsets of/Omega1n), the set
Pn =
{
P=[ p1,..., pn]: pj ≥ 0,
n∑
j=1
pj = 1
}
is clearly an(n−1)-dimensional simplex with the vertices[1,0,..., 0],... ,
[0,...,0, 1]. It will be convenient for us to represent P by the diagonal
n× n-matrix
P=
⎡
⎢
⎣
p
1 0
...
0 pn
⎤
⎥
⎦ .
Then the characteristic properties of P take the form
P≥ 0, Tr P= 1, (1.2.4)
where Tr denotes thetrace, i.e., the sum of diagonal elements of a matrix.

9 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
If X is a random variable on /Omega1n with the values x1,..., xn, then putting
X=
⎡
⎢
⎣
x
1 0
...
0 xn
⎤
⎥
⎦
we get that the expectation of X with respect to the probability distribu-
tion P is equal to
n∑
j=1
pj x j = Tr PX . (1.2.5)
Consider the set On of random variables, satisfying 0≤ x j ≤ 1, i.e.,
0≤ X≤ I (1.2.6)
where I is the unit n× n-matrix. Then On is a convex set – a unit hyper-
cube, the extreme points being its vertices, represented by the matricesX
for which x j is either 0 or 1. Such matrices satisfy X2 = X, so that the
extreme points of On are the idempotent (projection) matrices.
This elementary consideration leads naturally to the following con-
struction which is of principal interest in connection with quantum theory.
We can consider (complex) n× n-matrices as operators acting in the n-
dimensional unitary space
H of column-vectors ϕ=[ ϕ1], ψ=[ ψ1],...
The inner product of ϕ and ψ is de/g192ned by:(ϕ|ψ) = ∑ϕ jψj .W e
shall use Dirac’s notation|ϕ),|ψ) ,... for column-vectors ϕ, ψ,... and
(ϕ|,( ψ|,... for the Hermitean conjugated row-vectors ϕ∗,ψ∗,... The
symbol for the inner product is then simply a graphic junction of symbols
for the factors (ϕ| and|ψ). The “outer” product|ψ)(ϕ| is then the n× n-
matrix with the components[ψ
jϕk].I f ψ is the unit vector, (ψ|ψ) = 1,
then Sψ =| ψ)(ψ| is the matrix of the (orthogonal) projection on the
vector ψ.
The /g192nite-dimensional spectral theorem says that for any Hermitean
n×n-matrix X there is a complete orthonormal system of vectors{ej; j=
1,...,n }, in which X has the diagonal form
X=
n∑
j=1
λj|ej)(ej|, (1.2.7)
where λj are the eigenvalues of X, which are real. It follows that ej is an
eigenvector of X corresponding to the eigenvalue λj .
In (1.2.7) the λj ’s are not necessarily different. Denote by x1,..., xm
(m≤ n) the distinct eigenvalues of X numbered in the increasing order,

10 Alexander Holevo
and by Ek = ∑|ej)(ej| (the sum extends over all ej belonging to λk )
the matrix of projection onto the invariant subspace of X, correspond-
ing to the eigenvalue λk. Then we have a different form of the spectral
representation
X=
m∑
k=1
xk Ek. (1.2.8)
Consider the set Sn of all Hermitean n× n-matrices S=[ sjk] satisfying
the conditions
S≥ 0, Tr S= 1, (1.2.9)
which have the same form as (1.2.4). By the /g192nite-dimensional spectral
theorem
S=
n∑
j=1
λj Sψ j , (1.2.10)
where λj are the eigenvalues of S,a n d Sψ j =| ψj )(ψj| are the mutu-
ally orthogonal projections on the unit eigenvectors of S. The condition
(1.2.7) implies that the eigenvalues of S ∈ Sn constitute a probability
distribution
λj ≥ 0,
n∑
j=1
λj = 1.
In particular, 0≤ λj ≤ 1 and (1.2.10) implies
S− S2 =
n∑
j=1
λj (1− λj)Sψ j ≥ 0,
with the sign of equality attained if and only if S= Sψk for some ψk, i.e.,
if S is a one-dimensional projection.
Proposition1.2.3. The set Sn in convex, its extreme points being pre-
cisely one-dimensional projections.
Proof. The /g192rst part of the statement follows from the fact that the condi-
tions (1.2.9), de/g192ningS
n sustain forming convex combinations. To prove
that any one-dimensional projection S is an extreme point of Sn, assume
that
S= p0 S0+ p1 S1;
p0, p1 > 1, p0+ p1 = 1.

11 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Taking square of this equality, subtracting and using the inequality S ≥
S2 for S∈ Sn, we obtain
S− S2 = p0(S0− S2
0)+ p1(S1− S2
1)+ p0 p1(S0− S1)2
≥ p0 p1(S0− S1)2.
Since S is a one-dimensional projection, then S= S2, which implies that
S0 = S1. Therefore S is an extreme point.
To prove the converse consider the spectral representation (1.2.10).
Since Sψ j ∈ Sn and Sψ j ̸=Sψk for j ̸=k, then for an extreme point
S of Sn the sum (1.2.10) can have only one nonzero term. Therefore
S= Sψ j for some ψj , which proves the proposition.
The relation (1.2.10) is one of many possible representations of S as a
convex combination of the extreme points.
We consider also the convex set Xn of all Hermitean n× n-matrices
X, satisfying (1.2.6), and show that the extreme points of this set are the
(orthogonal) projections, i.e.,( Hermitean) matrices satisfying X 2 = X.
The proof of the statement that every projection is an extreme point is the
same as in Proposition 1.2.3. To prove the converse, write the spectral
decomposition of the matrix X in the form (1.2.8) with 0 ≤ x
k ≤ 1
where xk are the distinct eigenvalues of X, Ek is the projection onto the
invariant subspace of X, corresponding to the eigenvalue xk. Since x1 <
··· < xm, then using in (1.2.8) the Abel transform and taking into account
the equality E1+···+ Em = I ,w eh a v e
X= (1− x1)· 0+
m−1∑
k=1
(xk − xk+1)· E′
k + xm · I,
where E′
k = E1 +···+ Ek . Since the projections 0, I and E′
k belong
to Xn and the coef/g192cients are nonnegative and sum to 1, then this is a
convex combination of distinct projections. If X is an extreme point,
then the sum can have only one nonzero term, and the matrix X must be
a projection.
The difference between the sets Pn and Sn (correspondingly, between
On and Xn) is that in the latter case we consider all Hermitean matrices,
satisfying (1.2.9) (correspondingly (1.2.6)), while in the former case only
the diagonal matrices. We could consider as well a commuting family of
matrices which can be simultaneously diagonalized. Therefore the latter
case may be called the “noncommutative” analog to the former; de/g192ning
the mean value by (1.2.5) one may treat S ∈ S
n as a “noncommutative

12 Alexander Holevo
probability distribution”, and a Hermitean matrix X as a “noncommuta-
tive random variable”. We shall see this connection to be deeper than a
pure formal analogy.
We took the complex matrices because of their relevance to quantum
theory, but the real matrices can be treated similarly.
At the end of this section we consider in some detail the structure of
the convex set S
n in the simplest “noncommutative” case, n = 2. Any
matrix S∈ S2 can be represented as
S= 1
2
[1+ θ3 θ1− iθ2
θ1+ iθ2 1− θ3
]
, (1.2.11)
where θ1, θ2, θ3 are the real numbers called the Stokes parameters. The
condition S≥ 0 is equivalent to the inequality θ2
1 + θ2
2 + θ2
3 ≤ 1. Thus,
S2 as a convex set can be represented by the unit ball in the three-
dimensional real vector space; the extreme points are the matrices for
which the vector[θ
1,θ 2,θ 3] lies on the sphere θ2
1 + θ2
2 + θ2
3 = 1.
If n > 2, then the set Sn is a proper subset of the unit ball in the
(n2 − 1)-dimensional real vector space, and it cannot be represented so
explicitly.
1.3. De/g192nitionofastatisticalmodel
Motivated by consideration in Section 1.1, we de/g192ne astatistical model1
as a pair (S, M) where S is a convex set and M is a class of af/g192ne maps
of S into the collections of probability distributions on some measurable
spaces U. The elements of S are called states, and the elements of M
measurements. The problem of theoretical description of an object or a
phenomenon satisfying the statistical postulate can then be described as
a problem of construction of an appropriate statistical model. In more
detail, the construction must /g192rst give a mathematical description of the
set S of theoretical states and the set M of theoretical measurements and
second, prescribe the rules for correspondence between the real proce-
dures of preparation and measurement and the theoretical objects,i.e.,a n
injection of the experimental data into the statistical model.
The probability theory and statistics deal with the models in which the
set of the states S has the speci/g192cally simple structure. The statistical
model of quantum theory is drastically different. We shall consider these
models in detail in the following sections.
1 The concept of statistical model will be considered in the Supplement in greater detail.

13 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
In this chapter we shall often simplify our consideration by using only
the measurements with a /g192nite number of outcomes. In such a case
the space U is /g192nite and the probability distribution of the results of the
measurement is described by a /g192nite collection of real af/g192ne functionals
{μ
S(u); u∈ U} on S, satisfying
μS(u)≥ 0, u∈ U;
∑
u∈U
μS(u)= 1. (1.3.12)
Here μS(u) is the probability of the result u when the state is S. For any
B⊂ U
μS(B)=
∑
u∈B
μS(u).
Technically this case is much simpler than the continual one, being still
suf/g192cient to expose the essential features of the theory. In practice such
measurements correspond to the procedures resulting in some classi/g192ca-
tion of the data. Furthermore, one can easily imagine a /g192nitely-valued
approximation of a measurement with a continual space of the outcomes
U by making a partition of U into a /g192nite number of “small” pieces.
A two-valued measurement is called atest. Denoting one of the results
of the test by 0, and the other by 1 we get that any test can be described
by de/g192ning only one function onS,s a yμ
S(1), the probability of getting
1, since μS(0)= 1−μS(1). The probability μS(1) is an af/g192ne functional
on S satisfying 0≤ μS(1)≤ 1.
Let S→ μS(du) be a measurement with an arbitrary space of results
U. Then to any B ∈ A (U) there corresponds the test S →{ μS(B),
μS(B)}, the result of which is 0 if u ∈ B and is 1 if u ∈ B.( B denotes
the complement of the set B). Thus, any measurement can be considered
as a collection of tests (satisfying apparent compatibility conditions).
1.4. Theclassicalstatisticalmodel
We have seen in Section 1.1 that the notion of state refers to the initial
conditions of the experiment. Here we shall adopt that these conditions
can be formally described by the points ω of some set /Omega1, which will be
called phase space.
To take into account the possibility of variations in the initial data dur-
ing the repetitions of an experiment, or uncertainties in some parameters
in the preparation procedure we shall consider also the probability distri-
butions on /Omega1. To do this we must accept that/Omega1is a measurable space
with a σ -/g192eld
A (/Omega1); we assume thatA (/Omega1)separates the points of /Omega1.
Any probability distribution P on /Omega1will be called classical state.I t
should be interpreted as a statistical description of the preparation stage.

14 Alexander Holevo
To any ω∈ /Omega1corresponds the pure state described by the δ-distribution
δω(A), A∈ A (/Omega1). According to Section 1.2 the collectionP(/Omega1)of all
classical states is the convex set of the most simple structure, the simplex,
and the pure states are its extreme points.
A measurement with values in U is described by an af/g192ne map
P→ μ
P(du) (1.4.13)
which transforms the set of classical states P(/Omega1)into the set of prob-
ability distribution P(U). Denote by Mω(du) the probability distribu-
tion of the given measurement with respect to a pure state δω, so that
Mω(du)= μδω (du), and consider the mixture of the pure states
P(dω)=
∑
α
pαδωα (dω).
Since (1.4.13) is af/g192ne, the probability distribution of the results with
respect to this state will be given by
μ
P(B)=
∫
Mω(B)P(dω), B∈ A (U). (1.4.14)
Under some additional assumptions this relation will be valid for any
classical state P. We shall not discuss this question and simply restrict
our attention to measurements P → μ
P , which have the form (1.4.14)
where Mω(du) is a conditional probability distribution on U2. While P
describes the uncertainty in the initial conditions of the experiment, the
probability distribution M
ω(du) characterizes the disturbance due to the
measuring device. The relation (1.4.14) shows how these two sources
of uncertainty enter into the overall measurement statistics. We shall
denote by M both the conditional probability distribution {M
ω(du)} and
the corresponding measurement (1.4.13).
The classical statistical model which we are going to de/g192ne is based on
the assumption of complete observability, according to which the values
of any parameters of the object can be established with absolute precision.
To give a precise formulation we introduce the following de/g192nition. The
measurement M ={ M
ω(du)} is called deterministic if for any ω ∈ /Omega1
and B ∈ A (U) either Mω(B) = 0o r Mω(B) = 1. This means that if
the object is in a pure state, then for any B ∈ A (U) the result of the
2 This means that for anyω∈ /Omega1,Mω(du) is a probability distribution onU, and for any B∈ A (U),
Mω(B) is a measurable function of ω.

15 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
measurement u is either in B or not in B with probability 1. This can be
written in the following form
Mω(B)2 = Mω(B), B∈ A (U). (1.4.15)
The nature of this condition can be made clear by discussing /g192nitely-
valued measurements. Let M={ M
ω(u); u∈ U} be such a measurement,
where Mω(u) is the probability of the outcome u if the object is in the
pure state δω. These probabilities satisfy
Mω(u)≥ 0,
∑
u
Mω(u)= 1; ω∈ /Omega1. (1.4.16)
If M is deterministic measurement, then Mω(u) is equal to either 0 or 1.
Introducing the indicator of a set F ⊂ /Omega1as the function 1F(ω), which
is equal to 1 on F and 0 outside F,w eh a v eMω(U)=1/Omega1(u) (ω), where
/Omega1(u) ={ ω: Mω(u)= 1}. It follows from (1.4.16) that the sets /Omega1(u) for
different values of u do not intersect, and the union of all /Omega1(u) is equal to
/Omega1; this is expressed by saying that the sets{/Omega1(u)} form a decomposition
of the set /Omega1. Therefore for anyω there is a unique u = u(ω) such that
Mω(u(ω))= 1. For any B⊂ U
Mω(B)=
∑
u∈B
Mω(u)=1B(u(ω)). (1.4.17)
The function ω → u(ω) is a random variable on /Omega1with values in U;
the relation (1.4.17) establishes the one-to-one correspondence between
the deterministic measurements and the random variables with values in
U. To make this connection more transparent consider a random variable
X(ω) on /Omega1taking values in a /g192nite subset{x} of the real line R. Let /Omega1
(x)
be the subset of /Omega1on which X(ω) is equal to x, then
X(ω)=
∑
X
x·1/Omega1(x)(ω)=
∑
x
xMω(x). (1.4.18)
Thus, to the random variable X there corresponds the unique determinis-
tic measurement M={ Mω(x)} such that X takes a value x if and only if
x is the result of the measurement M.
The case of continuous random variables is technically much more
involved but the conclusion is essentially the same: under some regular-
ity conditions the relation (1.4.17) establishes the one-to-one correspon-
dence between the random variables and the deterministic measurements.
We can now formalize the requirement of the complete observability
by adopting the following de/g192nition. Theclassical statistical model is a

16 Alexander Holevo
model (P(/Omega1),M), where P(/Omega1)is the simplex of all probability distribu-
tions on the phase space/Omega1, and the classM contains all the deterministic
measurements.
Now consider the convex set M(U) of all af/g192ne mapsP → μP with
μP having the form (1.4.14).
Proposition1.4.1. Thedeterministicmeasurementsaretheextreme points
of M(U), and viceversa.
Proof. Let M={ Mω(B)} be a deterministic measurement and let M=
p0M0+ p1M1; p0, p1 > 0; p0 + p1 = 1, i.e.,
Mω(B)= p0 M0
ω(B)+ p1 M1
ω(B), B∈ A (U).
Taking the square of this equality and using the fact that Mω(B) =
Mω(B)2, we get after some algebra
p0 M0
ω(B)[1− M0
ω(B)]+ p1 M1
ω(B)[1− M1
ω(B)]
+ p0 p1[M0
ω(B)− M1
ω(B)]2 = 0,
whence, using the inequality M0
ω(B)[1− M0
ω(B)]≥0 and an analogous
inequality for M1, we get M0
ω(B) ≡ M1
ω(B). This means that M is an
extreme point of M(U).
Conversely, let M={ Mω(B)} be an extreme point of M(U). Let B1
be a /g192xed set fromA (U), B2 = B1, its complement. Put
M±
ω (B)= Mω(B)±[ Mω(B1)Mω(B∩ B2)
− Mω(B2)Mω(B∩ B1)]. (1.4.19)
Then Mω(B)= 1
2 M±
ω (B)+ 1
2 M−
ω (B). We shall show that{M±
ω (B)} are
conditional probability distributions onU. For this it is suf/g192cient to check
that M±
ω (B), B ∈ A (U), for any ω∈ /Omega1is a probability distribution. It
is clear that M±
ω (B) is a σ -additive function of B∈ A (U), since all the
terms in (1.4.19) are measures; moreover, M±
ω (U) = Mω(U) = 1. It
remains to check that M±
ω (B)≥ 0, but this follows from the inequality
M±
ω (B)≥ Mω(B∩ B1)[1∓ Mω(B2)]
+ Mω(B∩ B2)[1± Mω(B1)]≥0.
Since M is an extreme point it follows that M±
ω (B) = Mω(B), B ∈
A (U), i.e.,
Mω(B1)Mω(B∩ B2)= Mω(B2)Mω(B∩ B1).
Putting here B = B1 and taking into account that B1 ∩ B2 =∅ we get
Mω(B2)Mω(B1)= 0o r Mω(B1)[1− Mω(B1)]=0. Thus, {Mω(B)} is a
deterministic measurement.

17 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Let {M j} be a /g192nite collection of deterministic measurements from
M(U) and{pj} be a probability distribution. Then the convex combina-
tion
Mω(B)=
∑
j
pj M j
ω(B), B∈ A (U)
describes a randomized measurement in which a measurement M j is per-
formed with the probability pj . Physically it can correspond to /g193uctua-
tions in the measuring device. In the simplest case when both/Omega1and U are
/g192nite, the setM(U) is a compact convex subset of a /g192nite-dimensional
space and Theorem 1.2.2 implies that any element of M(U) can be re-
garded as a randomized measurement. Moreover, in the general case,
under some natural assumptions about /Omega1and U it is shown that any con-
ditional probability distribution{M
ω(du)} can be presented as a “contin-
ual convex combination” of the deterministic measurements
Mω(B)=
∫
Mα
ω(B)Q(dα), B∈ A (U).
This relation describes the randomized measurement, Q(dα) being the
randomizing distribution of the set of deterministic measurements. Thus,
having in mind randomized procedures, we can include in the class of
measurements M of the classical statistical model all the af/g192ne maps
P → μ
P from P(/Omega1)to P(U) de/g192ned by conditional probability distri-
butions{Mω(du)} according to (1.4.14) (for any /g192xedU).
At the end of this section we discuss the description of the tests in the
classical statistical model. Any test is uniquely de/g192ned by the function
X(ω)= Mω(1), ω∈ /Omega1, which satis/g192es
0≤ X(ω)≤ 1. (1.4.20)
The probability of the outcome 1 with respect to the classical state P is
equal to ∫
X(ω)P(dω).
For a deterministic test, either X(ω)= 0o r X(ω)= 1, so that X(ω)=
1/Omega1(1) (ω). Thus the deterministic test de/g192nes a dichotomy of the phase
space: /Omega1= /Omega1(1)∪ /Omega1(0), /Omega1(1)∩ /Omega1(0) =∅ .
If the space /Omega1is /g192nite,/Omega1= /Omega1n, then the set of the classical tests
(1.4.20) in the n-dimensional unit hypercube On, with the vertices as the
extreme points (see Section 1.2). The probability of the outcome 1 for
the test{X
ω} with respect to the state{Pω} is equal to /Sigma1ω Pω Xω.

18 Alexander Holevo
1.5. Reductionofstatisticalmodel.
Classicalmodelwitharestrictedclass
ofmeasurements
The assumption of complete observability underlying the classical statis-
tical model is an idealization which is valid in so far as its consequences
agree with the experience. An important fact we are going to discuss is
that weakening in some way the requirement of complete observability
will in general lead to statistical models which may be radically different
from the classical one.
Consider a statistical model (S, M). The states S
1, S2 ∈ S, S1 ̸=S2
are called indiscernible if for any measurement S → μS from the class
M the resulting probability distributions coincide: μS1 ≡ μS2 . There is
no way to distinguish between such states S1, S2, basing on the results
of the measurements, and from the point of view of an observer of the
results, the states S
1 and S2 are identical.
If we join the indiscernible states into the equivalence classes [S] and
put μ[S] = μS, we obtain a new statistical model(S′, M′), with S′being
the set of all equivalence classes[S] and M′the collection of af/g192ne maps
of the form[S]→μ [S]. This process will be called herereduction3 of the
initial model (S, M). The new model (S′, M′) is separated in the sense
that there are no indiscernible elements in S′. It was a separated model
which was the ultimate product of the statistical analysis of experiments
in Section 1.1.
Statistically the reduced model (S
′, M′) is completely equivalent to
the initial one. However, as we shall see, the new set of states S′can
be very different from S. Moreover, by choosing an appropriate class of
measurements M we can reduce the classical simplex S= P(/Omega1)practi-
cally to the arbitrary convex set S′. In particular, uniqueness of decom-
position into the extreme points need not hold for S′, as the following
elementary example shows.
Consider the “object” with the phase space consisting of four points,
/Omega1= /Omega14, so that a state is a vector[P1,..., P4] of the three-dimensional
simplex P4. For the measurements we shall take tests, i.e., the vectors
[X1,..., X4] from the four-dimensional hypercube O4, satisfying in ad-
dition the equality
X1+ X2 = X3+ X4. (1.5.21)
3 This reduction of the state space of a statistical model (in the Supplement it is called “compression”)
should not be mixed with the notorious “quantum state reduction”, i. e. the state change due to a
measurement.

19 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The states P={ Pj} and Q={ Q j} are indiscernible by these tests if and
only if (1.5.21) implies
∑
j
Pj X j =
∑
j
Q j X j,
i.e., the vector [Pj − Q j] is orthogonal to the hyperplane (1.5.21) in
the four-dimensional space. The orthogonal complement to (1.5.21) is
spanned by the vector e=[ 1, 1,−1,−1], therefore the states P ={ P
j}
and Q={ Q j} are indiscernible if and only if for some real t
P1 = Q1+ t, P3 = Q3− t,
P2 = Q2+ t, P4 = Q4− t. (1.5.22)
If P4 is represented as a tetrahedron in the three-dimensional space (Fig-
ure 1.3), then Pj are the barocentric coordinates of a point in the tetrahe-
dron, and the equations (1.5.22) de/g192ne the set of parallel lines; a class of
the indiscernible states will be presented by the segment of a line lying in
the tetrahedron. The reduced set of states can therefore be identi/g192ed with
the projection of the tetrahedron along the direction of the lines onto an
appropriate plane (Figure 1.3), which is a convex quadrangle.
12
43
S
S1
Figure1.3.
This example shows that narrowing the set of possible tests may result in
“sticking together” the states and originating new forms of convex states
in which uniqueness of the decomposition into extreme points need not
hold. Without entering into detail here, we mention that the restrictions
on measurements may re/g193ect the presence of some empirical symmetry
relations. In the elementary example given above this role is played by
the relation (1.5.21); in quantum mechanics, where the spatially-temporal
description is essential, the symmetries with respect to the kinematical
and dynamic transformations appear to be primarily important.

20 Alexander Holevo
We now consider a description of the quantum-mechanical object – the
spin−
1
2 particle. As we shall see later, the states of this object in quantum
theory are described by the 2× 2-matrices of the form (1.2.11). The set
of this matrices S2 can be represented by the unit ball in the real three-
dimensional space, as shown in Section 1.2. It is instructive to investigate
what kind of a restriction can reduce a classical simplex to this convex
set which in a sense is contrary to the simplex: the whole of its boundary
consists of extreme points and the decomposition into them is highly non-
unique.
We shall consider a schematic description of the Stern-Gerlach exper-
iment which had led to the discovery of spin. The beam of silver atoms
passes between the poles of the magnet creating the inhomogeneous mag-
netic /g192eldB, increasing in the vertical direction. The particles which have
passed through the /g192eld are collected by the plate
E. From the distribu-
tion of the substance accumulated by the plate E one can infer about the
deviation of the particles under the action of the magnetic /g192eldB (Fig-
ure 1.4).
While the classical theory predicted continuous scattering in all direction,
i.e., a more or less smooth distribution of the substance accumulated by
the plate, the experiment showed the sharp splitting of the incoming beam
into the two symmetrical beams in the vertical direction. By using other
substances it was also possible to obtain splittings of the beam into more
than two components. The spin of the particle is the integer of half-
integral j such that 2 j+ 1 is the number of the splitting components, so
that in the Stern-Gerlach experiment j=
1
2 .
Placing instead of the plate E a screen with an aperture one obtains a
/g192lter which allows to pass, say, the upper outgoing beam and absorbs the
lower one. The /g192ltered beam, which is called polarized in the directionB,
does not split under the repeated action of the inhomogeneous /g192eld with
the same direction B and thus it passes without absorption through the
same /g192lter which was used for its preparation. However it does split and


21 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
therefore is partially absorbed by the second /g192lter with the other direction
of the /g192eldB. It is completely absorbed if the direction ofB in the second
/g192lter is opposite to that of the initial one.
A schematic classical description of the /g192lter is furnished by a unit vec-
tor
θ=[ θ1,θ 2,θ 3], giving the orientation of the /g192lter,i.e., the direction of
the inhomogeneous magnetic /g192eldB. All other parameters remain /g192xed
and therefore can be omitted from the description. Consider the follow-
ing experiment: the beam of a given intensity is /g192rst prepared by passing
through the /g192rst /g192lter
θin and then passing through the second /g192lterθout
after which the intensity of the outgoing beam is measured. The ratio of
this intensity to the half of the incoming intensity then gives the proba-
bility for a particle prepared by the /g192lter
θin to pass through the /g192lterθout
(It is supposed that the incoming beam is “chaotic”, so that exactly one
half of the incoming beam passes through the /g192rst /g192lter.).
The “phase space” /Omega1is the set of all possible directions
θin, i.e., the
unit sphere S2 in the real three-dimensional space. A classical state is
a probability distribution P(dθ) on S2, describing “partially polarized”
beam. The pure states δθ corresponds to completely polarized beams and
the uniform distribution to the “chaotic”, unpolarized beam.
Denote byPr{θout|θin} the probability that the particle prepared by the
/g192lterθin passes through the /g192lterθout (Figure 1.5). From the rotational
symmetry it is natural to expect that this probability depends on the di-
rections
θin, θout only through the angle ϕ between them, or through their
inner product t= θin· θout. ThusPr{θout|θin}= F(t),−1≤ t≤ 1.
θin
θout
Figure1.5.
If the directions θin and θout coincide, then Pr{θout|θin}=1; if they are
opposite, then Pr{θout|θin}=0. Hence F(1) = 1, F(0) = 0. For any
direction θout the deviated particles go either in the directionθout or in the
opposite direction, whence F(t)+ F(−t) = 1, or 1
2 − F(t) =− 1
2 +
F(−t). Thus 1
2 − F(t) is an odd function of t ∈[ −1, 1] taking values
∓1
2 at the ends of the interval.

22 Alexander Holevo
The simplest continuous function satisfying these conditions is the linear
function F(t)=
1
2(1+ t), i.e.,
Pr{θout|θin}= 1+ θout· θin
2 = cos2 ϕ
2. (1.5.23)
We shall see later that it is this expression for the probabilityPr{θout|θin}
which is given by the quantum theory. This distribution is in agreement
with experimental data.
If we agree that the result of the measurement is 1 if the particle, pre-
pared by the /g192rst /g192lter passes through the second /g192lter
θout,a n d0i fi ti s
absorbed, then this measurement can be considered as the test, de/g192ned
by the function
X(
θ)= 1+ θout· θ
2 ; θ∈ S2. (1.5.24)
The probability of the result 1 when the prepared state is P(dθ) is equal
to
μP(1)=
∫ 1+ θout· θ
2 P(dθ). (1.5.25)
The set of the measurementsM for this model consists of all tests, de/g192ned
by the functions of the form (1.5.24) with θout ∈ S2.
The two classical states P1, P2 are indiscernible ifμP1 (1)= μP2 (1) for
all tests from M, i.e.,
∫
θ0· θP1(dθ)=
∫
θ0 · θP2(dθ), θ 0 ∈ S2,
or
∫
θP1(dθ) =
∫
θP2(dθ). Thus the reduced states are in one-to-one
af/g192ne correspondence
[P]↔
∫
θP(dθ)=
[∫
θ1 P(dθ),
∫
θ2 P(dθ),
∫
θ3 P(dθ)
]
with the three-dimensional vectors, representable in the form θP =∫
θP(dθ), where P(dθ) is a probability distribution of the sphere S2,
i.e., with the points of the unit ball. From (1.5.25)
μ[P](1)= 1+ θout· θP
2 . (1.5.26)

23 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Now considering the components of vectors in the unit ball as Stokes
parameters we can introduce the matrices
S= 1
2
⎡
⎢
⎣
1+
∫
θ
3 P(dθ)
∫
(θ1− iθ2)P(dθ)
∫
(θ1+ iθ2)P(dθ) 1−
∫
θ3 P(dθ)
⎤
⎥
⎦ ,
X= 1
2
[1+ θ′
3 θ′
1− iθ′
2
θ′
1+ iθ′
2 1− θ′
3
]
,
where[θ′
1,θ′
2,θ′
3]= θout. Then the reduced states are represented by ma-
trices S from S2, the tests by matrices X, and by (1.5.26) the probability
of the result 1 for the test X and the state S is equal to
μS(1)= Tr SX =
∫
X(θ)P(dθ).
In fact, we have constructed a “hidden variables” model for the spin −1
2
particles. We shall return to this point in Section 1.7 after the introduction
of the general quantum statistical model.
1.6. Thestatisticalmodelofquantummechanics
The main subject of our study will be the statistical model, in which states
are described by complex Hermitean matrices S, satisfying
S≥ 0, Tr S= 1,
and called density matrices. The set of all such matrices S
n is a con-
vex set, its extreme points being the one-dimensional projections Sψ =
|ψ)(ψ|, (ψ|ψ)= 1 (see Section 1.2). The corresponding states are called
pure. In what follows we shall be mainly interested in the in/g192nite-dimen-
sional analog of the density matrix, but in this chapter we shall content
ourselves with the /g192nite-dimensional case to demonstrate the main fea-
tures without entering into technical dif/g192culties associated with in/g192nite
dimensionality.
Next we must describe the class of quantum-theoretic measurements.
According to the general de/g192nition any measurement with values in the
space U is described by an af/g192ne map of the set of statesS
n into the
set of probability distributions on U. We shall assume that U is /g192nite.
In this case the structure of any such map is described by the following
proposition.

24 Alexander Holevo
Proposition1.6.1. The relation
μS(u)= Tr SMu, u∈ U, (1.6.27)
establishes the one-to-one correspondence between af/g192ne maps S→ μS
of the set of density matrices Sn into the set of probability distributions
on U and the resolutions of identity {Mu; u∈ U}, i.e., the collections of
Hermitean matrices{Mu}, satisfying
Mu ≥ 0,
∑
u∈U
Mu = I. (1.6.28)
Lemma1.6.2. Any af/g192ne functionalμ(S) in Sn has the form μ(S) =
Tr SM, where M is a Hermitean matrix.
Proof. The set of all density matrices spans the real linear space L of
all Hermitean matrices. This means that any Hermitean matrix can be
represented as T = ∑
j tj Sj , where tj are real numbers, Sj are density
matrices (this follows,e.g., from the spectral representation ofT ). Extend
μ from Sn to L putting
μ(T)=
∑
j
tj μ(Sj).
We must show that the sum in the right-hand side of this equality does
not depend on the particular representation of T as a linear combination
of density matrices, i.e., that the equality∑
j tj Sj = ∑
k t′
k S′
k implies
∑
j
tjμ(Sj)=
∑
k
t′
kμ(S′
k).
Transferring if necessary some terms into another side, we can maketj ≥
0 and t′
k ≥ 0, at least one of tj and t′
k being strictly positive. Taking the
trace of the resulting equality we get ∑
j tj = ∑
k t′
k = τ> 0, since
Tr Sj = Tr S′
k = 1. Introduce the probability distributions pj = tj/τ,
p′
k = t′
k/t. It is suf/g192cient to show that∑
j pj Sj = ∑
k p′
k S′
k implies∑
j pj μ(Sj ) = ∑
k p′
kμ(S′
k), and this is a straightforward consequence
of the af/g192nity ofμ on Sn.
By construction μ(T) is a real linear function onL. Any such function
of T =[ tjk] evidently has the form
μ(T)=
∑
j,k
tjk m jk = Tr TM ,
where M=[ m jk] with m jk = mkj , so that M= M∗.

25 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Lemma1.6.3. Let X be a Hermitean matrix; then X ≥ 0 if and only if
Tr SX ≥ 0 for all S∈ Sn.
Proof. X ≥ 0 means that (ψ|Xψ) ≥ 0 for all (unit) vectors ψ, i.e.,
Tr Sψ X ≥ 0. By Proposition 1.2.3 it is equivalent to Tr SX ≥ 0, S ∈
Sn.
Proof of Proposition 1.6.1. By Lemma 1.6.2 μS(u) = Tr SMu, where
{Mu} is a collection of Hermitean matrices. Positivity of μS(u) and
Lemma 1.6.3 imply thatMu ≥ 0. Finally∑
u μS(u)= Tr S(∑
u Mu)= 1
for all S∈ Sn whence ∑
u Mu = I . Indeed, Tr S(∑
u Mu − I)= 0 for
all S∈ Sn so that by Lemma 1.6.3∑
u Mu− I ≥ 0 and∑
u Mu− I ≤ 0.
This proves the proposition.
The collection{Mu} is formally analogous to the conditional probabil-
ity distribution {Mω(u)} which served to describe measurements in the
classical statistical model. We have noticed the particular role played
there by the deterministic measurements. The analog of the correspond-
ing condition (1.4.15) in the quantum case has the form
M
2
u = Mu, u∈ U. (1.6.29)
This means that Mu is a projection matrix. We now show that (1.6.29)
implies
Mu Mv = 0, u̸=v, (1.6.30)
i.e., Mu, Mv are mutually orthogonal projections.
Lemma1.6.4. Let A, B, C be Hermitean matrices satisfying 0≤ B≤ C
and C A= 0. Then B A= 0.
Proof. C A= 0 implies A∗CA= 0, whence 0= A∗CA≥ A∗ BA≥ 0 and
A∗ BA = 0. This can be written as (
√
BA )∗(
√
BA ) = 0 where
√
B
is the positive square root of B ≥ 0. It follows that
√
BA = 0 and
BA = 0.
To derive (1.6.30) we write (1.6.29) as (I− Mu)Mu = 0 and observe
that by (1.6.28) 0 ≤ Mv ≤ I − Mu when u ̸=v. It remains to apply
Lemma 1.6.4 with A= Mu, B= Mv, C= I− Mu.
Thus, the formal quantum analog of classical deterministic measure-
ments is the orthogonal resolutions of identity{Eu}:
Eu Ev = δuv Eu,
∑
u
Eu = I.

26 Alexander Holevo
The corresponding quantum measurements are called simple. Whereas a
classical deterministic measurement de/g192nes a decomposition of the phase
space /Omega1into mutually disjoint sets /Omega1
(u), a simple quantum measurement
furnishes a decomposition of the unitary vector space H into the direct
sum of mutually orthogonal subspaces H(u) = Eu(H ). Let the out-
comes of a simple measurement{Ex} be real numbers{x}, then one can
introduce the Hermitean operator
X=
∑
x
xE x. (1.6.31)
This relation establishes one-to-one correspondence between simple
measurements and Hermitean operators in
H similar to the correspon-
dence (1.4.18) between deterministic measurements and random vari-
ables in probability theory. Hermitean operators therefore play in quan-
tum theory the same role as random variables in probability theory; they
are also called (quantum) observables. The mean value of the measure-
ment{E
x} is expressed directly in terms of the corresponding observable,
∑
x
xμS(x)=
∑
x
x Tr SE x = Tr SX .
In the standard presentations of quantum theory observables are the
primary objects. Equivalently, one can start with the simple measure-
ments described by orthogonal resolutions of identity. We have seen,
however, that the consistent probabilistic treatment of an experimental
situation leads to general resolutions of identity. Elimination of non-
orthogonal resolutions and restriction to simple measurements should be
based on some additional argument; a simple formal analogy with the
probability theory is, apparently, not enough for this purpose. In the prob-
ability theory the exceptional role of the deterministic measurements is
substantiated by the property expressed in Proposition 1.4.1, according to
which the statistics of any measurement can be obtained from statistics of
deterministic measurements by an appropriate randomization. However,
it is important to realize that this fact has no analogy in quantum theory.
Denote by M(U) the convex set of all resolutions of identity{M
u; u∈
U}.
Proposition1.6.5. Any orthogonal resolution of identity{Eu; u∈ U} is
an extreme point of M(U). The converse is true only if U ={ 0, 1};i fU
has more than two elements, then there exists an extreme point ofM(U),
which is not an orthogonal resolution of identity.
Proof. The /g192rst statement is proved in the same way as its classical ana-
log in Proposition 1.4.1. If U ={ 0, 1}, then any resolution of identity has

27 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
the form{I− X, X} where X satis/g192es 0≤ X≤ I . As we know from Sec-
tion 1.2 this last convex set has projections as its extreme points, therefore
if the measurement{I− X, X} is an extreme point, then I− X and X are
both projections. This proves the /g192rst part of the second statement.
Let now U ={ 1,...m }, m > 2. Consider /g192rst the casen≡ dim
H=
2. One may imagine that the density matrices S∈ S2 describe the states
of the spin- 1
2 particle (see Section 1.5). Then the state prepared by the
/g192lter with the directionθ=[ θ1,θ 2,θ 3] is described by the density matrix
(1.2.11). In particular, the density matrix
Sα = 1
2
[1 e−iα
eiα 1
]
=| ψα)(ψα|;
|ψα)= 1√
2
[e−iα/2
eiα/2
]
,
(1.6.32)
describes the state prepared by the /g192lter with the directionθin =[ cos α,
sin α,0]. Consider m directions, corresponding to αu = 2πu/m; u =
1,...,m , which divide the coordinate plane θ1, θ2, into m equal angles
(see Figure 1.6), so that
m∑
u=1
exp(iαu)= 0. (1.6.33)
Then the collection
Mu = 2
m|ψu)(ψu| (ψu = ψαu ), (1.6.34)
(d = 3)
α1
α2
α3
Figure1.6.

28 Alexander Holevo
constitutes a non-orthogonal resolution of identity. Indeed, Mu ≥ 0 and
via (1.6.33), (1.6.32),∑
u Mu = I .
We shall show that for m = 3 the resolution of identity (1.6.34) is an
extreme point. Indeed, let
Mu = p0 M0
u + p1 M1
u; p0, p1 > 0,
then M0
u ≤ p−1
0 Mu, M1
u ≤ p−1
1 Mu, whence M j
u = λj
u|ψu)(ψu|. The
condition∑
u M j
u = I together with (1.6.32) leads to equations
3∑
u=1
λj
u exp
⎫
i2πu
3
⎬
= 0,
3∑
u=1
λj
u = 2.
The /g192rst means thatλj
u are the lengths of the sides of a regular triangle,
so that λj
u are all equal to each other; the second equality then implies
λj
u = 2
3 . Thus M0
u = M1
u = Mu and{Mu} is an extreme point.
Now let n ≥ 2 and m ≥ 3. Decompose the n-dimensional space Hn
into the direct orthogonal sum of a two-dimensional subspace H2 and
its orthogonal complement Hn−2 and denote by E the projection onto
Hn−2. Let{Mu; u= 1, 2, 3} be the resolution of identity in H2 given by
(1.6.34). Then the collection
˜M1 = M1 ⊕ 0, ˜M2 = M2⊕ 0, ˜M3 = M3⊕ E;
˜Mu = 0, u≥ 3,
forms a non-orthogonal resolution of identity in H, which is easily seen
to be an extreme point of M(U).
Though the construction given above may seem somewhat arti/g192cial,
these arguments do show that unlike classical statistics, in quantum the-
ory there are no serious reasons to con/g192ne oneself to the orthogonal res-
olutions of identity. In fact, we shall see later that there is a variety of
physical quantities, measurements of which are naturally described by
the non-orthogonal resolutions of identity.
Based on the foregoing discussion we mean by the statistical model,
of quantum mechanics the model in which states are described by the
density matrices S, and measurements by all af/g192ne mapsS→ μ
S, trans-
forming density matrices into probability distributions.
It is worthwhile to emphasize here again that statistical model is a
mathematical object. The fact that an array of experimental data is satis-
factorily described by the given model (S, M) means that there is an in-
jection of the properly treated data into the model, i.e., to any real prepa-
ration procedure one can ascribe a theoretical state S∈ S and to any real

29 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
measurement a theoretical measurement M ∈ M. Here we have given
an abstract description of the quantum statistical model; in the following
chapters the rules for correspondence between physical and mathemati-
cal objects will be elaborated. These rules (based mainly on the concepts
of symmetry and covariance) allow to connect at least some theoretical
states and measurements to their physical prototypes.
However in general there is no guarantee that any quantum-theoretic
state or measurement can be physically implemented, even in principle.
Possibility of such implementation requires special study in each par-
ticular case. The relevance and the usefulness of quantum theory are
ultimately con/g192rmed by the continuing success of its application.
Nevertheless the theoretical concepts of states and measurements re-
/g193ect the essential features of real physical experiments; any general re-
sult obtained in the framework of quantum theory wittingly applies to
“implementable” states and measurements in so far as quantum theory
gives a correct model for reality. On the other hand, there results could
not be obtained without the reference to the general concepts of state and
measurement.
1.7. Ontheproblemof“hiddenvariables”
The discussion in Section 1.5 shows that the reduction of a classical
model can lead to convex sets of states, drastically different from the
classical simplex. Here we shall demonstrate that in fact any convex set
of states can be generated by the reduction of a classical model with an
appropriately restricted class of measurements
4. For simplicity we as-
sume that the convex set is /g192nite-dimensional, and consider only /g192nitely-
valued measurements, but the statement and the proof can be generalized
to much more general cases.
Theorem1.7.1. Any separated statistical model(S, M), with S being a
compact subset of a /g192nite-dimensional space,M being a class of /g192nitely-
valued measurements, is a reduction of a classical model with a restricted
class of measurements.
Proof. We shall take for the phase space of the classical system the set
/Omega1of all extreme points of S, which will be denoted by the letter ω.I f
S → μ
S is a U-valued measurement from M, then the function μω(u);
4 For a more detailed discussion see the Supplement.

30 Alexander Holevo
ω ∈ /Omega1,u ∈ U, is a conditional probability distribution 5 on U. Thus
to any measurement M : S → μS there corresponds the conditional
probability distribution ˜M={ μω(u)}, the correspondence being one-to-
one: Theorem 1.2.2 implies that the af/g192ne functionals coincident on the
extreme points coincide on the whole convex set.
Consider the classical model with the set of states P(/Omega1)and the mea-
surements described by the conditional probability distributions of the
form ˜M ={ μ
ω(u)}, corresponding to all measurements M of the ini-
tial model. Denote by ˜M the class of such classical measurements. We
shall show that the reduction of the model (P(/Omega1),˜M) gives the model
(S, M).
For any probability distribution P on /Omega1the vector-valued integral
∫
/Omega1
ωP(dω) (1.7.35)
can be de/g192ned in a /g192nite-dimensional space, containing the setS.I f
P= ∑
j pj δωj , then
∫
/Omega1
ωP(dω)=
∑
j
pj ωj, (1.7.36)
so that
∫
ωP(dω) represents a point in S, i.e., a state. In general the
integral (1.7.35) is the limit of /g192nite convex combinations of the form
(1.7.36), and since S is compact, the limit also belongs to S. The in-
tegral (1.7.35) is a continuous analog of a convex combination of pure
states. Since any af/g192ne functional on a /g192nite-dimensional space is evi-
dently continuous then
μ
S(u)=
∫
/Omega1
μω(u)P(dω)
for any measurement S→ μS if S=
∫
ωP(dω).
Let now P1 and P2 be two indiscernible classical states on /Omega1, so that
∫
/Omega1
μω(u)P1(dω)=
∫
/Omega1
μω(u)P2(dω), u∈ U,
5 The requirement of measurability with respect toω is satis/g192ed sinceμω(u), ω∈ /Omega1, is the restriction
of the af/g192ne functionalμS(u), S∈ S to the set of extreme points /Omega1, which is known to be a Borel
set for any compact convex set S.

31 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
for all ˜M={ μω(u)}. By the foregoing argument this is equivalent to
μS1 (u)= μS2 (u), u∈ U
where Sj =
∫
ωPj(dω); j = 1, 2. Since the initial statistical model is
separated, it follows that
S1 ≡
∫
/Omega1
ωP1(dω)=
∫
/Omega1
ωP2(dω)≡ S2.
Thus, to a class of indiscernible classical states[P] there corresponds the
state
∫
ωP(dω)∈ S where P is arbitrary representative of the class[P].
This correspondence is apparently one-to-one; moreover, it maps af/g192nely
the set of all classes [P] onto the set S, since for any extreme point ω
of S the class, containing the pure classical state δ
ω corresponds to the
state ω. Indeed since by Theorem 1.2.2 any S ∈ S can be represented
as S = ∑ pjωj , then S =[ ∑ pj δωj]. Thus the reduction of the model
(P(/Omega1),˜M) results in the set of states S and the class of measurements
M, so that ∫
/Omega1
μω(u)P(dω)= μ[P](u), (1.7.37)
for any state S=[ P] and measurement S→ μS.
The case of quantum statistical model is the most important and we
consider the construction of Theorem 1.7.1 for this case in some detail.
Letˆ/Sigma1
n be the unit sphere in the complexn-dimensional space of column-
vectors|ψ),
ˆ/Sigma1n ={ ψ: (ψ|ψ)= 1}.
The two vectors ψ, ψ′correspond to one and the same pure state Sψ =
|ψ)(ψ| if ψ = λψ′with|λ|=1. Denote by /Sigma1n the set of the corre-
sponding equivalence classes in ˆ/Sigma1n. The elements of /Sigma1n are in one-to-
one correspondence with the pure states in Sn. The set /Sigma1n will play the
role of the phase space for the classical model we are going to describe.
Let P(dψ) be a probability distribution on /Sigma1n. Then the integral
SP =
∫
/Sigma1n
|ψ)(ψ|P(dψ)
de/g192nes a density matrixSP ∈ Sn. In fact, any density matrix is repre-
sentable in such form. By (1.2.8), S = ∑λj Sψ j , so that S = SP with
P = ∑λjδψ j . Thus P → SP is an af/g192ne map of the simplexP(/Sigma1n)
onto the set of quantum states Sn.

32 Alexander Holevo
Let S → μS(u), u ∈ U, be a quantum measurement. By Proposi-
tion 1.6.1μS(u)= Tr SMu, u∈ U, where{Mu} is a resolution of identity.
Consider the conditional probability distribution on U:
Mψ(u)≡ μSψ (u)= (ψ|Muψ). (1.7.38)
Then for any measurement
∫
/Sigma1n
Mψ (u)P(dψ)= μSP (u), u∈ U.
Thus the quantum statistical model is the reduction of the classical model
with the phase space /Sigma1
n and the restricted class of measurements de-
scribed by transition probabilities of the form (1.7.38) with {Mu} being
an arbitrary resolution of identity.
Note that in the case n= 2 this construction gives the classical model
for the spin-1
2 particle discussed in Section 1.5. In this case there exists a
classical description for preparation of pure states in terms of the Stern-
Gerlach /g192lter. If
θ =[ θ1,θ 2,θ 3]∈S 2 is the direction of a /g192lter, then
the corresponding density matrix (1.2.11) is a one-dimensional projection
Sψ =| ψ)(ψ|, i.e., a pure state. Therefore we can identify the set of pure
states /Sigma12 with the unit sphere S2 and any probability distribution on /Sigma12
can be interpreted as a classical state in the experiment, described on the
Figure 1.5.
Whether one can give such “physical” interpretation for the formal
construction of the Theorem 1.7.1 in cases other than spin-
1
2 particle de-
pends on the possibility of interpreting an element ψ ∈ /Sigma1n as “input
data” for some classical preparation procedure. Without going into detail
we mention that for particle with spin j >
1
2 there are state vectors ψ
which can hardly be interpreted in terms only of polarizing /g192lter as it was
done in Section 1.5 for j=
1
2 .
Nevertheless, Theorem 1.7.1 says that at least on the formal level any
statistical model is equivalent to a “hidden variables” model. The role
of the “variables” plays ω running over the “phase space” /Omega1, the at-
tribute “hidden” re/g193ecting the incomplete observability which is due to
the restrictions onto classical measurements. This statement, of course,
does not mean the possibility of reduction of quantum mechanics to a
form of Newtonian classical mechanics but it sounds contradictory to
the widely known thesis of the impossibility of “hidden variables” de-
scription in quantum theory. This thesis suggested by von Neumann also
concerns only the statistical description of the results of quantum mea-
surements. The original, rather controversial von Neumann’s argument
was later substantially modi/g192ed and brought up to the statute of fairly

33 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
nontrivial theorems. In fact there is no contradiction at all. To prove
a theorem one has /g192rst to formalize the notion of a hidden variables
theory. The construction of Theorem 1.7.1 does not ful/g192l some addi-
tional requirements imposed in the existing “no-go” theorems (see the
Supplement).
Roughly speaking, one usually requires that quantum observables
should be necessarily described by classical random variables in a hidden
variables theory, with preservation of some functional relations of logical
nature. However the statistical analysis of experimental situations carried
out in this chapter suggests that the tenet of observable can be replaced by
the broader and more /g193exible concept of measurement. The conclusion
of Theorem 1.7.1 is just a natural consequence of this approach, while
the more severe logical restrictions on hidden variables theories seem to
lack statistical motivation.
Anyhow, the introduction of the classical description is achieved in
Theorem 1.7.1 at the price of drastic increase in the dimensionality of the
set of states (from 3 to∞ in the spin-
1
2 case). Apparently it does not sim-
plify the description of the object, introducing a lot of details which are
not re/g193ected in the measurement statistics. A concise and adequate de-
scription of all relevant statistical information is provided by the quantum
theory.
The considerations of this chapter are of general nature and apply in
fact to any situation in which the validity of the “statistical postulate” is
ensured. So far quantum theory provides a unique example of a non-
classical statistical model for a class of real objects and phenomena. Are
there other /g192elds in which nonclassical models may appear to be relevant?
In this connection we wish to recall Bohr’s observations concerning the
features or “quantum-mechanical” behavior in the animate nature. Even
without making any speculative hypothesis about possible mechanisms of
these phenomena there is a general reason for expecting “non-classical”
relationships in the animate world. As Bohr himself pointed out any ob-
servation of a living organism is limited in so far as it inevitably presumes
an in/g193uence upon the organism. In quantum physics the “elementary” of
the observed object is the property which does not allow to neglect the
in/g193uence of measuring devices. The fundamental property of the living
organism is its “wholeness” which excludes arbitrary intervention into
the course of biological processes. The complete “classical” analysis of
an organism is incompatible with maintaining it alive. A simple junction
of admissible factors may occur to be inadmissible; the order of in/g193u-
ences may also be important. This shows that a statistical model of a
biological object, if it ever will be created, may well be a non-classical
one, containing in its very structure the information about fundamental

34 Alexander Holevo
limitations on observability of the object. Anyhow the classical model,
which comes back to the Newtonian mechanics, is by no means a unique
possibility in the statistical modelling of non-mechanical objects.
1.8. Comments
Sections 1.1-1.3. In view of the immensity of the literature on basic
quantum physics we have to con/g192ne ourselves to the few sources which
were used in writing this book. These are Dirac [30], Fock [37], Man-
delstam [95], Bohm [17], Blokhintzev [13]. The last two books follow
the historical development of quantum theory. For this see also the ju-
bilee collections [86, 111] where different contemporary viewpoints are
presented. A thorough discussion of an experimental situation with the
emphasis on its two-staged character is given by Fock [38].
The description of a measurement in quantum mechanics can be real-
ized with a different degree of detail. There are several levels of descrip-
tion, to each of them corresponds a de/g192nite mathematical object in the
Hilbert space H of the system. Let us stress that the term “measurement”
as it is used in the present book corresponds to the least detailed descrip-
tion which amounts only to the statistics of outcomes of a measurement
procedure for arbitrarily prepared state. Theorem 2.1 of Chapter 2 shows
that this is equivalent to de/g192ning some resolution of the identity inH.
In the modern literature this level of description is usually denoted as
“generalized observable” or just “observable” (in the last case orthogonal
resolutions of the identity correspond to “standard” or “sharp” observ-
ables). The most detailed description requires a dynamical picture of the
measurement process, i. e. interaction of the system with a measuring de-
vice with subsequent observation of the outcomes, which, in particular,
completely determines the statistics of outcomes. The reverse correspon-
dence: “statistics – measurement process” is highly nonunique. Mea-
surement of one and the same observable can be realized via different
processes. For more detail see [178, Section 4.1.3]
The concept of statistical model originates largely from the recent at-
tempts of foundation of quantum mechanics using the theory of partially-
ordered vector spaces (see Ludwig [90], Hartk ¨amper [49], Neumann
[104]; Davies and Lewis [29], Davies [26–28]), though in fact it can be
traced back to the earlier axiomatics of Mackey [92]. However, Mackey
imposes further axioms aimed to get the “quantum-logic” description,
excluding the appearance of non-orthogonal resolutions of identity. The
de/g192nition of measurement as an af/g192ne map of states into the probabil-
ity distributions was suggested by the author [56]. From the viewpoint
adopted here the “state-space” approach to the foundations of quantum

35 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
theory (Gudder [46], Krause [82]) is the most relevant. The connection
between this approach and the theory of partially-ordered vector spaces
is clearly displayed in the paper of Ozawa [106].
Theorem 1.2.2 is due to Minkowski; it was extended to the case of a
compact convex set in a general topological linear space by Krein and
Milman. For the theory of convexity see Rockafellar [121] (/g192nite-dimen-
sional case), Valentine [134] and Alfsen [4].
For the spectral representation of Hermitean matrices and other topics
from linear algebra see, e.g., Halmos [47] and Maltsev [94].
Section 1.4. Since the publication of the basic treatise of Kolmogorov
[78], a large amount of textbooks on probability theory have appeared.
An accessible introduction to this theory, suf/g192cient for our purposes, is
given by Gnedenko [43]. In the classical mathematical statistics one
speaks of “strategies” and “decision rules” instead of “measurements”.
Randomized strategies were introduced by Wald [140], the founder of
statistical decision theory (see also Ferguson [34] and Chentzov [22]).
Section 1.5. An elementary quantum-mechanical treatment of the ex-
periments with Stern-Gerlach /g192lters is given in Feynmann’s lectures [36].
Other hidden-variables models for the spin-
1
2 particle were given by
Kochen and Specker [77] and Bell [11].
Section 1.6. Fundamentals of the operator formalism of quantum me-
chanics were given in the classical treatise of Dirac [30]. The ideas of
Dirac’s approach underlie, in particular, the elementary course of Feyn-
mann [35], based substantially on /g192nite-dimensional spin models. It
seems that Feynmann was one of the /g192rst to call the probabilists’ attention
to the interesting problems of connections between quantum mechanics
and probability [35].
The /g192rst mathematically rigorous treatment of foundations of quantum
mechanics, based on the theory of Hilbert space, was given by von Neu-
mann [138]. The notion of density operator was developed in his book,
motivated by initial /g192ndings of Landau and Weyl. Also the Dirac’s con-
cept of observable was made precise by using self-adjoint operators and
the corresponding spectral theorem. This book was the starting point for
several attempts to axiomatize quantum theory, i.e., to construct a set of
simple, physically meaningful postulates which would imply the Hilbert
space formalism. Ideally, one would like something as ef/g192cient as Kol-
mogorov’s axioms in probability theory. Mackey [92] formulated a set of
axioms which leads to “propositional calculus” generalizing σ -/g192elds of
probability theory. The problem is then to characterize mathematically
the “quantum logic” of projections in a Hilbert space. This problem was

36 Alexander Holevo
discussed by several authors and was solved by Piron [110]. A detailed
exposition of the quantum-logic approach to the foundations of quan-
tum theory is given in the book of Jauch [71], the mathematical aspects
of this approach are considered by Varadarajan [135]. Unfortunately, in
contrast to Boolean σ -/g192elds which constitute an inseparable part of the
classical probability calculus, the quantum logics are rather of indepen-
dent mathematical interest, the physical theory dealing directly with op-
erators, not “propositions”. Moreover, only Mackey’s axioms 1-6 which
are very close to the de/g192nition of a statistical model have an undeniable
probabilistic meaning. Other axioms are introduced so as to get the con-
ventional concept of observable. Being good for probability theory, this
restricts the concept of quantum measurement to the orthogonal resolu-
tions of identity.
The general resolutions of identity (they are also called positive oper-
ator-valued measures in distinction to projection-valued measures which
are orthogonal resolutions of identity) where introduced in quantum mea-
surement theory by Davies and Lewis [29] and Holevo [57]. Davies and
Lewis came to this generalization by considering repeated quantum mea-
surements. The book of Davies [27] contains an account of the corre-
sponding results in which the state changes due to a measurement play
an essential role. The exposition in Section 1.6 follows Holevo [56–60].
This statistical theory of measurement can be generalized to include both
classical and quantum theories as extreme particular cases [64].
Section 1.7. An informal discussion of “no-go” results can be found
in the survey by Wightman [143] (see also the Supplement). A detailed
comparative physical consideration of various hidden-variables theories
is contained in the book of Belinfante [10].
The relations between the atomic physics and the biological sciences
are discussed in Bohr’s philosophical papers [18] (see also Bohm [17]).
The celebrated “complementarity principle” sheds light onto the nature of
limitations in quantum-mechanical experiments, which however deserves
further investigations.

Chapter 2
Mathematics of quantum theory
2.1. OperatorsinaHilbertspace
In the previous chapter the quantum statistical model was introduced in
its simplest /g192nite-dimensional form. However to describe many interest-
ing and important properties of quantum-mechanical objects the in/g192nite-
dimensional generalization of this model is needed, where matrices are
replaced by operators in a Hilbert space.
A Hilbert space is a complex linear space
H of vectors ϕ,ψ,... with
the inner product (ϕ|ψ), which is complete with respect to the metric
∥ϕ− ψ∥=√(ϕ− ψ|ϕ− ψ). We shall deal only with separable spaces
which have at most countable complete orthonormal system of vectors,
i.e., a orthonormal basis. For some reasons to be explained later it will
be convenient to take (ϕ|ψ) linear in ψ and conjugate-linear
1 in ϕ.A
typical example is the space L 2(a, b) of the Lebesgue square-integrable
functions on (a, b) with the inner product
(ϕ|ψ)=
∫b
a
ϕ(x)ψ(x) dx.
A map ϕ →ˆϕ of a Hilbert space H into a Hilbert space ˆH is called
isometric,i f
(ϕ|ψ)= (ˆϕ|ˆψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ H.
Since it implies ∥ϕ∥≡∥ˆϕ∥, any isometric map is one-to-one. If there
is a linear isometric map of H onto ˆH, then H and ˆH are called
isomorphic. For example, L 2(0, 2π) is isomorphic to the space l2 of
square-summable sequences c =[ ck] with the inner product (c|c′) =
1 Conjugate-linearity means that coef/g192cients in a linear combination of vectors transform into their
complex conjugates.

38 Alexander Holevo
/Sigma1∞
k=−∞¯ckc′
k . The corresponding map is given by
ck = 1√
2π
∫2π
0
f (x)eikx dx; k= 0,±1,...,
the isometric nature of it is ensured by the Parseval relation. From the
point of view of general theory difference between isomorphic Hilbert
spaces is inessential, since any proposition about one of the isomorphic
spaces can be in principle translated into the terms of another. However in
fact the translation may be quite complicated; moreover, an appropriate
choice of a concrete Hilbert space may substantially simplify description
and study of a mathematical object. For example to study the operator of
derivation in
L 2(0, 2π) it may be convenient to pass to the space l2 of
the Fourier coef/g192cients etc.
Our choice of the inner product, linear in the second argument, is re-
lated to the useful Dirac’s notation for the vectors in a Hilbert space. This
notation is widely used by physicists and we shall also adopt it.
By the fundamental Riesz-Frechet lemma any linear continuous (with
respect to the norm ∥·∥) functional on
H has the form ϕ → (ψ|ϕ)
where ψ is a vector from H (and vice versa). Therefore the vector ψ
can be considered not only as an element of H, but also as an element
of the dual space H ∗ of linear continuous functional on H. Denote ψ,
treated as an element of H,b y|ψ), and treated as an element of H∗,b y
(ψ|. Then|ψ) → (ψ| is an one-to-one conjugate-linear map of H onto
H∗. In the /g192nite-dimensional case|ψ) corresponds to the column-vector
⎡
⎢
⎣
ψ
1
ψ2
.
.
.
⎤
⎥
⎦
and (ψ| to the row-vector[
ψ1,ψ2,... ]. As in the /g192nite-dimensional case
the symbol for inner product(ϕ|ψ) is the graphic junction of the symbols
(ϕ| and|ψ).
The main convenience of the Dirac’s notation is the possibility of sim-
ple representation of operators in terms of an “outer product”. Recall that
in the /g192nite-dimensional case the product of a column by a row of the
same dimensionality gives a square matrix. We shall denote by |ϕ
1)(ϕ2|
the operator which maps vector|ψ) into the vector|ϕ1)(ϕ2|ψ). Thus the
action of|ϕ1)(ϕ2| on|ψ) is described by a simple graphic junction of the
symbols. Operators of this form have rank 1, i.e., they map onto a one-
dimensional subspace. In particular, the (orthogonal) projection onto the
unit vector ψ can be written as
S
ψ =| ψ)(ψ|. (2.1.1)

39 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Finite linear combinations (or sums, which is the same) of rank-1 op-
erators
T =
∑
j
|ϕj)(ψj| (2.1.2)
describe operators of /g192nite rank. Any /g192nite collection of the /g192nite-rank
operators can be considered as acting in a /g192nite-dimensional sub-
space ˜
H ⊂ H, therefore algebraic operations for such a collection re-
duce to those for matrices. The product of two /g192nite-rank operators is
given by
[∑
j
|ϕj)(ψj|
]
·
[∑
k
|ˆϕk)(ˆψk|
]
=
∑
j,k
|ϕj )(ψj|ˆϕk)(ˆψk|. (2.1.3)
In the space L 2(a, b) the /g192nite-rank operators are the integral operators
with degenerated kernels; the operator (2.1.2) is described by the kernel
T(x′, x)=
∑
j
ϕj(x′)ψj(x). (2.1.4)
Clearly, this class does not include very many operators of interest.
One of the dif/g192culties with the in/g192nite-dimensional case is that an opera-
tor may be not de/g192ned (and not de/g192neable) on the whole
H. An example
is the operator of derivation in L 2(a, b). The most important is the class
of bounded operators, which are naturally de/g192ned on the wholeH. The
operator X is called bounded if
∥Xψ∥≤c∥ψ∥
for some constant c and all ψ ∈ H. Geometrically this means that X
transforms norm bounded sets of H into the norm bounded sets. The
least value of c, equal to
∥X∥=sup
ψ̸=0
∥Xψ∥
∥ψ∥
is called the norm of the operator X.
To any bounded X there corresponds the sesquilinear (linear in ψ,
conjugate-linear in ϕ) form on H :
X(ϕ, ψ)= (ϕ|Xψ).
This relation establishes one-to-one correspondence between bounded
operators in
H and sesquilinear forms, continuous in ϕ, ψ ∈ H. Con-
sider the form X∗(ϕ, ψ) = (ψ|Xϕ). The corresponding operator is
called adjoint to X and is denoted by X∗, so that
(X∗ϕ|ψ)= (ϕ|Xψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ H. (2.1.5)

40 Alexander Holevo
The conjugation X→ X∗ is a conjugate-linear map, satisfying
(XY )∗ = Y∗ X∗
and preserving the norm
∥X∗∥=∥X∥. (2.1.6)
Moreover,
X∗∗ ≡ (X∗)∗ = X.
A reader can check that for the /g192nite-rank operators
[∑
j
|ϕj )(ψj|
]∗
=
∑
j
|ψj)(ϕj|.
Let U be an isometric operator in H, i.e.,
(Uϕ|Uψ)= (ϕ|ψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ H.
Then U is bounded; by (2.1.5) the last relation can be written as
U∗U = I,
where I is the unit operator, mapping|ψ) into|ψ), ψ∈ H. An isometric
operator mapping H onto H is called unitary. The condition of unitarity
is
U∗U = UU∗ = I.
A bounded operator X is called Hermitean if the corresponding form
is Hermitean:
(Xϕ|ψ)≡ (ψ|Xϕ)= (ϕ|Xψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ H (2.1.7)
i.e., X∗ = X. There is a polarization identity which linearly expresses
a Hermitean form through its “diagonal” values for ϕ = ψ; therefore a
Hermitean operator X is uniquely de/g192ned by the values(ψ|Xψ), ψ∈ H.
Thus to establish a linear relation between Hermitean forms or operators
it is suf/g192cient to check it only for the “diagonal” values, a device we
shall often use. The norm of a Hermitean operator can be shown to be
expressed through the “diagonal” values by
∥X∥=sup
ψ̸=0
|(ψ|Xψ)|
∥ψ∥2 . (2.1.8)

41 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
In /g192nite-dimensional case this implies that the norm of a Hermitean oper-
ator is equal to the maximal absolute value of its eigenvalues. In general,
[−∥X∥,∥X∥]is the smallest closed interval, containing the spectrum of
X, though the notion of spectrum in the in/g192nite-dimensional case is more
complicated (cf. Section 2.3).
Let
H1 be a closed subspace of H, then the decomposition into the
direct orthogonal sum holds
H= H1⊕ H2,
where H2 ={ ϕ: (ϕ|ψ) = 0, ψ ∈ H1} is the orthogonal complement to
H1. For any ψ= ψ1⊕ ψ2 put Pψ= ψ1. Then
P2 = P, P∗ = P.
Conversely, any operator in H satisfying these two conditions is the
operator of (orthogonal) projection onto the subspace H1 ={ ψ : Pψ =
ψ}. We shall call such operators simply projections.
Let H1 be a /g192nite-dimensional subspace; then the projection ofψ onto
H1 can be written as
|ψ1)=
∑
j
|ej)(ej|ψ), (2.1.9)
where{ej} is any complete orthonormal system in H1. Therefore the
projection onto H1 is the /g192nite-rank operator
P=
∑
j
|ej )(ej|. (2.1.10)
This relation holds also for in/g192nite-dimensional closed subspace, how-
ever the question of convergences arises since an in/g192nite sum is involved.
The norm convergence is apparently not relevant here since∥|e
j)(ej|∥=
1. Two other types of convergence are useful. A sequence of opera-
tors{X
n} converges to X strongly if limn→∞∥Xnψ− Xψ∥=0 for any
ψ ∈ H;i t converges weakly if limn→∞(ϕ|Xnψ) = (ϕ|Xψ) for any ϕ,
ψ∈ H. For Hermitean operators this is equivalent to
lim
n→∞
(ψ|Xnψ)= (ψ|Xψ), ψ ∈ H.
The connections between the types of convergence are the following
norm
convergence⇒ strong
convergence⇒ weak
convergence.

42 Alexander Holevo
Let{ej} be an orthonormal system in H and H1 the closed subspace
spanned by{ej}. Since for anyψ the vector series (2.1.9) converges inH,
the operator series (2.1.10) converges strongly and de/g192nes the projection
operator onto
H1. In particular, for any orthonormal basis in H
I =
∑
j
|ej)(ej|. (2.1.11)
This is only an abbreviated form of the vector relation
|ψ)=
∑
j
|ej )(ej|ψ), (2.1.12)
expressing the completeness of the system{e j}.
Using (2.1.11), we have for any bounded operator X
X=
[∑
j
|ej )(ej|
]
X
[∑
k
|ek)(ek|
]
=
∑
j
∑
k
|ej)(ej|Xek)(ek|,
(2.1.13)
where the series are strongly convergent. The numbers (ej|Xek) are
called matrix elements of the operator X; this relation gives the decom-
position of a bounded operator into the linear combination of operators of
rank 1 – the matrix units{|e
j)(ek|}.I f X is a /g192nite-rank operator, then for
an appropriate system{ej} it has only a /g192nite number of nonzero matrix
elements.
A Hermitean operator X is called positive (denoted X≥ 0) if
(ψ|Xψ)≥ 0; ψ∈ H.
Clearly X∗ X ≥ 0 and XX∗ ≥ 0 for any X; X ≥ Y will mean that
X− Y ≥ 0.
The trace of a positive operator X is de/g192ned as
Tr X=
∑
j
(ej|Xe j ), (2.1.14)
where{ej} is an orthonormal basis in H. The series consists of non-
negative numbers; as in the /g192nite-dimensional case, the sum does not
depend on the choice of{e
j}, however it can be in/g192nite. Thus, forX≥ 0,
0≤ Tr X≤+∞ .
If X is not positive, then the de/g192nition of trace by (2.1.14) may turn
out to be incorrect; however as we shall see in Section 1.7 there are trace-
class operators for which the trace is unambiguously de/g192ned by (2.1.14).

43 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Meanwhile let us notice that this relation gives the correct de/g192nition for
/g192nite-rank operators. Indeed for any{e
j}
∑
j
(ej|ϕ)(ψ|ej)= (ψ|ϕ), (2.1.15)
whence
Tr|ϕ)(ψ|=(ψ |ϕ), (2.1.16)
so that
Tr
[∑
j
|ϕj)(ψj|
]
=
∑
j
(ψj|ϕj ). (2.1.17)
By (2.1.14), we obtain the relation for the trace of an integral operator
in L 2(a, b) with degenerated kernel T(x, y):
Tr T =
∫b
a
T(x, x) dx.
Equalities (2.1.17), (2.1.13) imply the important relations
Tr T∗ = Tr T, Tr TX = Tr XT , (2.1.18)
which will be generalized to a wider class of operators in Section 2.7.
2.2. Quantumstatesandmeasurements
A density operator is a positive Hermitean operator with unit trace:
S≥ 0, Tr S= 1. (2.2.19)
An example of a density operator is a one-dimensional projection (2.1.1).
As we shall see in Section 2.7 any density operator has the spectral rep-
resentation
S=
∑
j
sj|ψj )(ψj| (2.2.20)
analogous to (1.2.10) for the /g192nite-dimensional case. The series is con-
vergent in the operator norm. From (2.2.19) it follows that the eigenval-
ues{s
j} of a density operator satisfy
sj ≥ 0,
∑
j
sj = 1.
Denote by S(H ) the set of all density operators in H ;i f {Sj}⊂
S(H ) and {pj} is a /g192nite probability distribution then the operator

44 Alexander Holevo
∑ pj Sj satis/g192es (2.2.19). ThusS(H ) is a convex set. The density op-
erators represent states in quantum mechanics. It follows from (2.2.20)
that Proposition 1.2.3 can be generalized to the in/g192nite-dimensional case,
so that the extreme points of S(
H ) are the one-dimensional projections.
The corresponding states are called pure.
Now we pass to quantum measurements. Let U be a measurable space
of outcomes of the measurement, e.g., a /g192nite set or a domain inRn with
the Borel σ -/g192eld. Following Section 1.6 we call aquantum measurement
with values in U(U-measurement, for short) an af/g192ne mapS→ μS(du)
of the convex set of quantum states S(H ) into the set of all probability
distributions on U. μS(du) is interpreted as the probability distribution of
the results of the measurement in the state S. A generalization of Propo-
sition 1.6.1 will describe quantum measurements in terms of resolution
of identity; by this we mean a collection M ={ M(B); B ∈ A(U)} of
Hermitean operators in H, satisfying
(1) M(φ)= 0, M(U)= I ;
(2) M(B)≥ 0, B∈ A (U);
(3) for any at most countable decomposition{Bj} of B∈ A (U), M(B)=∑
j M(Bj) holds where the series is weakly convergent.
These conditions formally remind the de/g192nition of probability measure,
and resolutions of identity are sometimes called probability operator-
valued measures. If U is a /g192nite set and{M
u; u ∈ U} is a collection of
Hermitean operators satisfying (1.6.28),i.e., a /g192nite resolution of identity
in the sense of Section 1.6, then the relation
M(B)=
∑
u∈B
Mu, B⊂ U,
de/g192nes a operator-valued measure on the Boolean /g192eld of all subsets of
U, i.e., a resolution of identity in the sense of the de/g192nition given above,
and conversely.
A particular but very important class constitute orthogonal resolutions
of identity, satisfying the additional requirement
M(B1)M(B2)= 0i f B1∩ B2 =∅ .
As in Section 1.6 one can show that this is equivalent to
M(B)2 = M(B), B∈ A (U),
that is the measure{M(B)} is projection-valued.
Now we formulate the generalization of Proposition 1.6.1, which will be
proved in Section 2.7.

45 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Theorem2.2.1. Let S → μS be a U-measurement. Then there exists a
unique resolution of identity M ={ M(B); B ∈ A (U)} in H such that
for any state S
μS(B)= Tr SM (B), B∈ A (U). (2.2.21)
Conversely, any resolution of identity de/g192nes an U-measurement by
(2.2.21).
The relation (2.2.21) will sometimes be symbolically written in the
form
μ
S(du)= Tr SM (du).
Notice that the right-hand side of (2.2.21) is the trace of a generally non-
positive (and non-Hermitean) operator, which, however, is a trace-class
as it will be shown in Section 2.7. Meanwhile we remark that for a pure
state
μ
Sψ (B)= (ψ|M(B)ψ),
since Tr|ψ)(ψ|X= (ψ|Xψ) by (2.1.16).
Measurements described by orthogonal resolutions of identity will be
called simple. Any simple measurement is an extreme point of the convex
set M(U) of all U-measurements, the proof being quite the same as in
Proposition 1.6.5; the converse, of course, is not true.
The most important case is when the results of a measurement are real
numbers. Then the simple measurements are described in terms of ob-
servables, i.e., Hermitean operators in
H, which are quantum analogs of
classical random variables. The following section is devoted to a more
detailed study of this connection.
2.3. Spectralrepresentationofboundedoperators
In a /g192nite-dimensional case any Hermitean operatorX admits the spectral
representation
X=
∑
k
λk Ek, (2.3.22)
where Ek are the projections onto the invariant subspaces corresponding
to the distinct eigenvalues λk. The collection {Ek} forms an orthogonal
resolution of identity, so that
∑
k
Ek = I; E j Ek = δjk E j. (2.3.23)
An in/g192nite-dimensional analog of (2.3.22) holds for compact Hermitean
operators (see Section 2.7). However there are plenty of noncompact

46 Alexander Holevo
Hermitean operators. In fact, a Hermitean operator need not have an
eigenvector, as the following example shows.
Consider the operator Q of multiplication by the argument x in the
space
L 2(a, b) where (a, b) is a bounded interval. The equation
xψ(x)= ξψ( x) (2.3.24)
has the continual collection of formal solutions
ψξ (x)∼ δ(x− ξ); a <ξ<b , (2.3.25)
which however do not correspond to any nonzero vectors in H.
Nevertheless any Hermitean operator in a Hilbert space has a spectral
representation in which a continuous analog of the sum (2.3.22) emerges.
To explain the transition from sum to integral introduce the orthogonal
resolution of identity on the real line R, by putting
E(B)=
∑
k:λk∈B
Ek; B∈ A (R).
(A (R) is the Borel σ -/g192eld ofR). Formally
E(dλ)=
[∑
k
δ(λ− λk)Ek
]
dλ. (2.3.26)
Then the relation (2.3.22) can be rewritten as
X=
∫
λE(dλ). (2.3.27)
Now let E(dλ) be an arbitrary orthogonal resolution of identity on R.
In this section we suppose that it is concentrated on a bounded subset /Lambda1
of R, so that E(/Lambda1)= I . Then for any ψ∈ H the probability distribution
μψ(dλ) = Tr Sψ E(dλ) = (ψ|E(dλ)ψ) will be concentrated on /Lambda1and
therefore the integral
∫
λ(ψ|E(dλ)ψ)=
∫
λμψ(dλ) (2.3.28)
converges. This integral de/g192nes a continuous Hermitean form onH,t o
which corresponds the Hermitean operator X such that
(ψ|Xψ)=
∫
λ(ψ|E(dλ)ψ), ψ ∈ H. (2.3.29)
Thus (2.3.27) holds where the integral is weakly convergent in the sense
that (2.3.29) holds. (In fact, one can show strong convergence).

47 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Theorem2.3.1(Spectraltheoremforboundedoperators). The rela-
tion (2.3.27) establishes one-to-one correspondence between the Her-
mitean operators X and the orthogonal resolutions of identity in H
concentrated on bounded subsets of R.
The resolution of identity E(dλ) is also called the spectral measure of
the operator X.
Return for a while to operators, corresponding to /g192nite resolutions of
identity (2.3.26). The relations (2.3.23) imply that for any polynomial
p(λ)
p(X)=
∑
k
p(λk)Ek =
∫
p(λ)E(dλ).
In the general case, approximating integrals by sums, one shows that for
any Hermitean X
p(X)=
∫
p(λ)E(dλ).
Therefore one can de/g192ne a Hermitean operatorf (X) where f is a
bounded measurable function, by the relation
(ψ| f (X)ψ)=
∫
f (λ)(ψ|E(dλ)ψ); ψ∈
H.
In particular, putting f (x)=1B(x) we get the expression for the spectral
projections of X
E(B)=1B(X); B∈ A (R).
The equality
X2 =
∫
λ2 E(dλ)
implies the important relation
∥Xψ∥2 =
∫
λ2(ψ|E(dλ)ψ).
The correspondence f → f (X) preserves algebraic relations and the
ordering: f (x)≥ 0, x∈ R implies f (X)≥ 0. Thus putting
|X|=
∫
|λ|E(dλ), (2.3.30)
we have±X≤| X| since±x≤| x| for all x∈ R.

48 Alexander Holevo
As an example consider the operator Q in L 2(a, b).W eh a v e
Q=
∫b
a
ξ E(dξ), (2.3.31)
where E(B)=1B(x). Indeed (2.3.31) means that
(ψ|Qψ)=
∫b
a
ξμψ(dξ), (2.3.32)
where
μψ(B)= (ψ|E(B)ψ)
=
∫b
a
1B(x)|ψ(x)|2dx=
∫
B
|ψ(x)|2 dx,
so that μψ(dξ) =| ψ(ξ)|2dξ and (2.3.31) is obvious. Thus the collection
of projections {1B(·); B ∈ A ((a, b))} is the spectral measure of the
operator of multiplication by x.
The operator Q is a typical example of an operator with “continuous
spectrum”. We have seen that it has no eigenvectors in L 2(a, b) though
the equation (2.3.24) has the intuitively clear formal solutions (2.3.25).
In this connection let us discuss Dirac’s notation pertaining to operators
with continuous spectrum. Following Dirac, denote by |ξ) the formal
eigenfunction (2.3.25). The family {|ξ); ξ ∈ (a, b)} is “orthonormal” in
the sense that
(ξ
′|ξ)= δ(ξ− ξ′),
and satis/g192es the formal completeness relation
∫b
a
|ξ)(ξ|dξ= I. (2.3.33)
In fact (2.3.33) is just an abbreviated form of the equality
∫b
a
(ψ|ξ)(ξ|ψ)dξ= (ψ|ψ), ψ ∈ H,
which is meaningful if the symbol (ξ|ψ) is interpreted as
(ξ|ψ)=
∫b
a
δ(x− ξ)ψ( x)dx= ψ(ξ). (2.3.34)
Thus the family {|ξ)} is a formal continual analog of complete or-
thonormal system, the relation (2.3.33) being the analog of the com-

49 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
pleteness relation (2.3.32). The spectral representation of Q in Dirac’s
notation has the form
Q=
∫b
a
ξ|ξ)(ξ|dξ (2.3.35)
and looks like a direct continual analog of the spectral representation
(1.2.7) for discrete spectrum. In fact (2.3.35) means that
(ψ|Qψ)=
∫
b
a
ξ(ψ|ξ)(ξ|ψ)dξ, ψ ∈ H,
and this is equivalent to (2.3.32). Thus we obtain the relation between
(2.3.31) and (2.3.35) by putting
E(dξ)=| ξ)(ξ|dξ.
Needless to say that this relation cannot be taken literally – the projection-
valued measure E(dξ) is not differentiable (has no operator density) with
respect to Lebesgue measure dξ. However the scalar measuresμ
ψ(dξ)=
(ψ|E(dξ)ψ) are differentiable with respect to dξ with
μψ(dξ)=| ψ(ξ)|2dξ= (ψ|ξ)(ξ|ψ)dξ. (2.3.36)
The intuitive maintenance of Dirac’s formalism gives certain advan-
tages in presentation of quantum theory. It can be properly used in the
framework within which it is equivalent to the spectral representation.
2.4. Spectralrepresentationofunboundedoperators
For quantum mechanics it is important to have a generalization of the
spectral representation for unbounded operators. Let X be an operator
de/g192ned on its domain
D(X) ⊆ H ; for unbounded operators domain
considerations are essential since, with an immaterial exception, such an
operator cannot be de/g192ned on the whole
H. The operator is called sym-
metric if the corresponding sesquilinear form is Hermitean on D (X),
i.e.,
(Xϕ|ψ)= (ϕ|Xψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ D (X). (2.4.37)
The most important is the concept of a self-adjoint operator. Let the
domain of X be dense in H ; denote by D (X∗) the subspace of vectorsϕ,
for which ψ → (ϕ|Xψ) is a continuous functional of ψ. By the Riesz-
Frechet lemma, (ϕ|Xψ)= (ϕ∗|ψ), where ϕ∗ is de/g192ned uniquely sinceψ
runs over the dense set D (X). Denote by X∗ the operator ϕ→ ϕ∗ with
the domain D (X∗). It is called the adjoint to X. Thus
(X∗ϕ|ψ)= (ϕ|Xψ); ψ∈ D (X), ϕ ∈ D(X∗).

50 Alexander Holevo
In particular, X is symmetric if X ⊆ X∗, i.e., D (X) ⊆ D(X∗) and
Xψ= X∗ψ on D (X).
A densely de/g192ned operatorX is called self-adjoint if X = X∗, i.e.,
D (X∗)= D (X) and (2.4.37) holds.
Sometimes symmetric operator X can be extended to a self-adjoint
operator. If this can be done uniquely, then X is called essentially self-
adjoint. A symmetric operator which does not have self-adjoint exten-
sions is called maximal.
The following important examples illustrate these notions. Let Q be
the (unbounded) operator of multiplication by x in L 2(R) with
D (Q)=
{
ψ:
∫∞
−∞
x2|ψ(x)|2dx <∞
}
.
For any ϕ, ψ∈ D (Q) one has
(ϕ|Qψ)=
∫
xϕ(x)ψ(x)dx= (Qϕ|ψ),
so that Q is symmetric. In fact it is self-adjoint; to prove it consider
ϕ ∈ D (Q∗). Then
∫
xϕψ dx is a continuous functional of ψ and by
the Riesz-Frechet lemma
∫
xϕψ dx =
∫
hψ dx where h ∈ L 2(R).I t
follows that h = xϕ and
∫
|xϕ(x)|2dx <∞, so that D (Q∗)= D (Q).
The same operator considered on a smaller dense subspace D ⊂ D (Q)
is easily seen to be essentially self-adjoint.
Next consider the operator P= i−1 d/dx with the domain
D (P)=
{
ψ:
∫∞
−∞
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dx ψ(x)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dx <∞
}
.
The Fourier transform
˜ψ(η)= 1√
2π
∫∞
−∞
e−iηxψ(x) dx
maps isometrically L 2(R) onto L 2(R), the operator P is transformed
into the operator of multiplication by η with D (P) mapped onto the
subspace{˜ψ :
∫
|ηˆψ(η)|2 dη< ∞}. From what is proved above for the
multiplication operator it follows that P is also self-adjoint.
The next is an example of a symmetric operator which has no self-
adjoint extension. Let H = L 2(0,∞) and consider the operator P+ =
i−1d/dx with the domain
D (P+)=
{
ψ: ψ(0)= 0,
∫∞
0
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dx ψ(x)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dx <∞
}
. (2.4.38)

51 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Then
(ϕ|P+ψ)= i−1
∫∞
0
ϕ(x) d
dx ψ(x) dx
= i−1ϕ(0)ψ(0)− i−1
∫∞
0
d
dx ϕ(x)ψ(x) dx
= (P∗
+ϕ|ψ), ϕ ∈ D (P∗
+),
(2.4.39)
where P∗
+ = i−1d/dx with
D (P∗
+)=
{
ψ:
∫∞
0
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dx ψ(x)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dx <∞
}
.
Then P+ ⊂ P∗
+, P+ ̸=P∗
+, since D (P+)̸=D (P∗
+). The operator P+ is
symmetric but P∗
+ is not since if we try to compute (P∗
+)∗ by the formula
analogous to (2.4.39), the term i−1ϕ(0)ψ(0) will be nonzero, yielding
(ϕ|P∗
+ψ)̸=(P∗
+ϕ|ψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ D (P∗
+).
One can show that P+ is maximal.
Now we pass to the spectral representation of self-adjoint operators.
Consider the integral of the type (2.3.27), where E(dλ) is an arbitrary
orthogonal resolution of identity on R. One cannot expect that the inte-
gral in the right-hand side of (2.3.29) will converge for all ψ ∈ H, but it
certainly converges if ψ belongs to the subspace
D=
{
ψ:
∫∞
−∞
λ2(ψ|E(dλ)ψ) <∞
}
. (2.4.40)
One shows that D is dense in H and the Hermitean form (2.3.28) de/g192nes
a self-adjoint operator X with D (X)= D, so that
(ψ|Xψ)=
∫
λ(ψ|E(dλ)ψ), ψ ∈ D, (2.4.41)
∥Xψ∥2 =
∫
λ2(ψ|E(dλ)ψ), ψ ∈ D. (2.4.42)
The last equality explains why it must be D (X)= D.
Theorem2.4.1(Spectraltheoremforself-adjointoperators). The re-
lations (2.4.41) and (2.4.40) establish the one-to-one correspondence be-
tween self-adjoint operators and orthogonal resolutions of identity(spec-
tral measures) in H.

52 Alexander Holevo
Consider the self-adjoint operator Q of multiplication by x in L 2(R).
The same argument as in Section 2.3 shows that its spectral measure is
E(B)=1B(x); B∈ A (R), (2.4.43)
or, formally E(dξ) =| ξ)(ξ|dξ, where|ξ), ξ ∈ R are the formal eigen-
vectors of the operator of multiplication, so that the Dirac’s notation
Q=
∫∞
−∞
ξ|ξ)(ξ|dξ.
Consider now the operator P = i−1 d/dx in L 2(R) with the domain
(2.4.39). This operator has the family of formal eigenfunctions
1√
2π
eiηx; η∈ R,
satisfying the conditions of orthonormality and completeness of the type
(2.3.33). Denoting the formal eigenvectors by|η); η∈ R one may expect
the spectral representation
P=
∫
∞
−∞
η|η)(η|dη.
To give these considerations precise meaning, consider the Fourier trans-
form ˜ψ(η) = (η|ψ). In Dirac’s notations the Fourier transform corre-
sponds to the change of the “orthonormal basis”{|ξ)} to{|η)},
(η|ψ)=
∫
(η|ξ)(ξ|ψ) dξ
since
(η|ξ)= 1
√
2π
∫
e−iηxδ(ξ− x) dx= 1√
2π
e−iηξ .
Since the operator P is transformed into the operator of multiplication by
η, the spectral measure F(dη) of the operator P is obtained by inverse
Fourier transform of the spectral measure (2.4.43), namely
(ψ|F(B)ψ)= 1
2π
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
∫
B
ψ(x)ψ(x′)eiη(x−x′) dη dx dx′. (2.4.44)
Formally this can be written as
(ψ|F(dη)ψ)=
[1
2π
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
ψ(x)ψ(x′)eiη(x−x′)dx dx′
]
dη
= (ψ|η)(η|ψ) dη,
(2.4.45)

53 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
or F(dη)=| η)(η|dη, which is consistent with the formal spectral repre-
sentation of P.
All that was said in Section 2.3 concerning the functions of Hermitean
operators applies with obvious modi/g192cations to self-adjoint operators.
Consider in particular the function
e
iθ X =
∫
eiθλ E(dλ). (2.4.46)
One checks that the family{Vθ = exp iθ X; θ ∈ R} is a group of unitary
operators (unitary group, for short), i.e.,
Vθ1+θ2 = Vθ1 Vθ2 , V∗
θ = V−θ , V0 = I. (2.4.47)
One can also show that the family {Vθ} is strongly continuous in θ, i.e.,
for any ψ∈ H the relation
ψθ = eiθ X ψ; θ∈ R, (2.4.48)
de/g192nes a continuous curve in the Hilbert spaceH. Moreover, this curve is
differentiable in H if and only if ψ∈ D (X); in this case{ψθ}⊂ D (X)
and
dψθ
dθ = iXψθ . (2.4.49)
The converse statement is known as Stone’s theorem.
Theorem2.4.2. Any strongly (or weakly) continuous unitary group has
the form V
θ = exp iθ X where X is a uniquely de/g192ned self-adjoint opera-
tor.
The operator X is called the in/g192nitesimal generatorof the group{Vθ}.
Let us calculate {exp iθ P} in L 2(R). Using (2.4.46) and (2.4.45) we
obtain
(ψ|eiθ Pψ)= 1
2π
∫∫∫
ψ(x)ψ(x′)eiθη eiη(x−x′)dη dx dx′
= (ψ|ψθ ),
where ψθ (x)= ψ(x+ θ). Thus
eiθ Pψ(x)= ψ(x+ θ), θ ∈ R.
Now we pass to the spectral representation of symmetric but not nec-
essarily self-adjoint operators.

54 Alexander Holevo
Theorem2.4.3. For a densely de/g192ned symmetric operator X there exists
in general non-unique resolution of identity (spectral measure) M(dλ),
such that
D(x)⊆
{
ψ:
∫
λ2(ψ|M(dλ)ψ) <∞
}
;
(ψ|Xψ)=
∫
λ(ψ|M(dλ)ψ), ψ ∈ D(X);
∥Xψ∥2 =
∫
λ2(ψ|M(dλ)ψ), ψ ∈ D(X).
(2.4.50)
If X is maximal, and ⊆ is changed to= in the /g192rst relation, then M(dλ)
is unique.
As an example we consider the operator P+ in L 2(0,∞), and show
that its (unique) spectral measure can be represented as
M(dη)=| η+)(η+|dη, (2.4.51)
where|η+) are the formal eigenfunctions (1/
√
2π)eiηx , η ∈ R, which
differ from |η) only in that the argument x varies from 0 to ∞. The
family{|η+)} obviously satis/g192es the formal completeness relation
∫∞
−∞
|η+)(η+|dη= I, (2.4.52)
but is not “orthogonal”, since
(η′
+|η+)= 1
2π
∫∞
0
ei(η−η′)x dx
= 1
2δ(η− η′)+ 1
2πi(η− η′)−1.
(2.4.53)
Therefore (2.4.51) is not an orthogonal resolution of identity. Such fami-
lies as{|η
+)} are sometimes called “overcomplete”.
The correct version of (2.4.51) can be given by the relation of the type
(2.4.44):
(ψ|M(B)ψ)= 1
2π
∫∞
0
∫∞
0
∫
B
ψ(x)ψ(x′)eiη(x−x′)dxdx′dη. (2.4.54)
Extending the functions de/g192ned on(0,∞) by making them equal to
zero on (−∞, 0) we get a natural embedding of L 2(0,∞) into L 2(R).

55 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
M(dη) is the restriction onto L 2(0,∞) of the spectral measure F(dη) of
the operator P, i.e.,
(ψ|M(dη)ψ)= (˜ψ|F(dη)˜ψ),
where ˜ψ is the extension of ψ ∈ L 2(0,∞).I f ψ ∈ D (P+), then
˜ψ∈ D (P) with ˜P+ψ= P˜ψ. Therefore
(ψ|P+ψ)= (˜ψ|P˜ψ)=
∫
η(˜ψ|F(dη)˜ψ)=
∫
η(ψ|M(dη)ψ),
∥P+ψ∥2 =∥P˜ψ∥2 =
∫
η2(˜ψ|F(dη)˜ψ)=
∫
η2(ψ|M(dη)ψ),
which shows that M(dη) satis/g192es the relations (2.4.50), characterizing
the spectral measure of the operator P+.
2.5. Onrealizationofmeasurement
We have just seen that a nonorthogonal resolution of identity {M(B)}
in H may arise as a restriction of an orthogonal resolution of identity
{E(B)} in a larger Hilbert space ˜H :
M(B)= ˜EE (B)˜E; B∈ A (U), (2.5.55)
where ˜E is the projection from ˜H onto H. It is easy to see that restrict-
ing in this way any resolution of identity in ˜H one gets a resolution of
identity in H. The converse statement was proved by Naimark.
Theorem2.5.1. Any resolution of identity{M(B)} in H can be dilated
to an orthogonal resolution of identity in a larger Hilbert space ˜H,s o
that (2.5.55) will hold.
We shall give the proof of this theorem only for /g192nite resolutions of
identity since it is technically simple and clearly indicates the idea of the
proof in the general case.
Let
L be a linear space; by a pre-inner product we mean a form
(ϕ|ψ); ϕ, ψ ∈ L, possessing all properties of inner product except that
(ϕ|ϕ) may be equal to zero for a nonzero ϕ ∈ L. There is a standard
procedure of constructing a Hilbert space given a pre-inner product on
L : let N ={ ψ : (ψ|ψ) = 0}, then (·|·) uniquely de/g192nes the inner
product on the factor space L /N. The completion of L /N with respect
to this inner product is a Hilbert space which we call completion of L
with respect to the pre-inner product(·|·).

56 Alexander Holevo
Proof of Theorem 2.5.1. Let M={ Mu; u= 1,...,m } be a /g192nite resolu-
tion of identity in H. Let L be the direct sum of m copies of H, so that
the vectors of L are Ψ=[ ψu; u= 1,...,m ]. Then the form
(Ψ|Ψ′)∼ =
m∑
u=1
(ψu|Muψ′
u); Ψ,Ψ′∈ L,
is clearly a pre-inner product, positivity following from the fact thatMu ≥
0. Let ˜H be the completion of L with respect to (·|·)∼. The map
ϕ→ Ψϕ =[ ϕ; u= 1,...,m ] from H into ˜H is isometric since
(Ψϕ|Ψ′
ϕ
)∼ =
m∑
u=1
(ϕ|Muϕ′)= (ϕ|ϕ′); ϕ,ϕ′∈ H.
Identifying the image of H under this map with H, we can assume that
H ⊂ ˜H. De/g192ne the operatorEv in L which cuts all the components
of Ψ=[ ψu] to zero except for ψv which remains unchanged. Then it is
easy to see that operators {Ev; v= 1,...,m } give rise to an orthogonal
resolution of identity in ˜H.F o rϕ∈ H
(ϕ|Muϕ)= (Ψϕ|EuΨϕ)∼
which means that {Eu} is a required dilation of {Mu}. The theorem is
proved.
Basing on Theorem 2.5.1 we shall show that any quantum measure-
ment M in a sense reduces to a simple measurement E over a composite
quantum system which consists of the initial object plus some additional
quantum “degrees of freedom”. For this we shall need the notion of tensor
product of Hilbert spaces, which serves for the description of composite
quantum systems.
Let
H1, H2 be Hilbert spaces with the inner products (·|·)1 and (·|·)2.
Consider the linear space L of formal linear combinations of the ele-
ments ψ1 × ψ2 ∈ H1 × H2. Introduce in L the pre-inner product (·|·)
putting
(ϕ1× ϕ2|ψ1× ψ2)= (ϕ1|ψ1)1(ϕ2|ψ2)2 (2.5.56)
and extending it to L by linearity. The completion of L with respect
to this pre-inner product is called the tensor product of Hilbert space H1,
H2 and is denoted by H1⊗ H2. The vector of H1⊗ H2 corresponding to
the equivalence class of the vectorψ1× ψ2 ∈ L is denoted by ψ1⊗ ψ2.
From (2.5.56) it follows that
(ϕ1⊗ ϕ2|ψ1⊗ ψ2)= (ϕ1|ψ1)1(ϕ2|ψ2)2. (2.5.57)

57 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
A good illustration of this abstract de/g192nition is given by the following
example. Let H1 = L 2(Rn) be the space of the square-integrable func-
tions ψ1(x), x ∈ Rn, and H2 = L 2(Rm) that of the functions ψ2(y),
y∈ Rm. The L /N consists of the /g192nite sums of the form2
ψ(x, y)=
∑
j
ψ j
1 (x)ψ j
2 (y)
with
(ϕ|ψ)=
∫∫
ϕ(x, y)ψ(x, y)dn x dm y,
and H1⊗ H2 = L 2(Rn+m) is the space of all square-integrable functions
ϕ(x, y); x∈ Rn, y∈ Rm with the same inner product. The vectorψ1⊗ψ2
corresponds to the function ψ1(x)ψ2(y).
Turning back to the general case, consider two orthonormal bases –
{e j
1} in H1 and{ek
2} in H2. Then {e j
1 ⊗ ek
2} forms an orthonormal basis
in H1 ⊗ H2. It follows easily that any vector ϕ ∈ H1 ⊗ H2 can be
represented in the form ϕ = ∑
k ψk
1 ⊗ ek
2 where ψk
1 are some uniquely
de/g192ned vectors ofH1, such that ∑
k∥ψk
1∥2
1
<∞. The subspaces H1 ⊗
ek
2 ⊂ H1 ⊗ H2 consisting of vectors of the form ψ1 ⊕ ek
2, ψ1 ∈ H1, are
mutually orthogonal. Thus we have a decomposition of H1⊗ H2 into the
direct orthogonal sum of subspaces, each of which is isomorphic to H1:
H1⊗ H2 =
∑
k
⊕[H1⊗ ek
2]. (2.5.58)
The tensor product of operators X1⊗ X2, where X j is a bounded operator
in H j , is de/g192ned by the relation
(X1⊗ X2)(ψ1⊗ ψ2)= X1ψ1 ⊗ X2ψ2
on the vectors of the form ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 and then uniquely extended to the
whole H1⊗ H2 by linearity and continuity.
Consider the decomposition (2.5.58). Then any bounded operator X
in H1 ⊗ H2 can be described by the block matrix [X jk] the elements of
which are bounded operators in H1, as follows
X
⎫∑
k
ψk
1 ⊗ ek
2
⎬
=
∑
j
⎫∑
k
X jk ψk
1
⎬
⊗ e j
2.
2 More precisely, one should speak of the equivalence classes of the Lebesgue measurable functions.

58 Alexander Holevo
In particular the operator X1 ⊗ X2 is described by the matrix
[X1(e j
2|X2ek
2)2].
Proposition2.5.2. For any measurement M={ M(B)} in H there are
a Hilbert space H0, a pure state S 0 in H0 and a simple measurement
E={ E(B)} in H ⊗ H0 such that
μE
S⊗S0 (B)= μM
S (B); B∈ A (U), (2.5.59)
for any state S in H. Conversely, any such triplet (H0, S0, E) gives rise
to the unique measurement M in H satisfying (2.5.59).
Here μE
S⊗S0 (correspondingly μM
S ) denotes the probability distribution
of the measurement E (correspondingly M) with respect to the state S⊗
S0(S).
Proof. Let E be the orthogonal resolution of identity in ˜H the existence
of which is asserted by Theorem 2.5.1. Extending if necessary ˜H and
E we can assume that ˜H = H⊕ H⊕··· , H being embedded in ˜H
so that H= H⊕[ 0]⊕[ 0]⊕···. Then by the discussion preceding the
formulation of the proposition, ˜H= H⊗ H0 where H0 = l2 is the space
of square-summable sequences[cj : j = 1, 2,... ]. Let S0 = Sψ where
ψ=[ 1, 0, 0,... ]; then operator S⊗ S0 is described by the matrix
⎡
⎣
S 0:
00 :
.....
⎤
⎦
and it is clear that for any bounded X in
H⊗ H0 one has Tr(S⊗ S0)X=
Tr S˜EX ˜E. Substituting X= E(B) and using (2.5.55) we get (2.5.59).
To prove the converse note that the relation
μE
S⊗S0 (B)= Tr(S⊗ S0)E(B); B∈ A (U),
de/g192nes an af/g192ne mapS→ μE
S⊗S0 of the set of quantum states into the set
of probability distributions on U. According to Theorem 2.2.1 there is a
measurement M satisfying (2.5.59) and the proposition is proved.
The proposition says that the measurements E and M are statistically
equivalent in the sense that they have the same probability distributions
for any state S.
We call the triple(
H0, S0, E) a realization of measurement M. A real-
ization corresponds to a simple measurement over the system H ⊗ H0,

59 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
consisting of the initial system H and additional independent degrees of
freedom H0 in the /g192xed stateS0. In classical statistics this would cor-
respond to a randomized procedure in which the additional system can
be regarded as a “roulette” generating random numbers according to the
probability law S
0. The role of H0 in quantum case will be more clear
when we shall consider an example (see Section 3.7).
2.6. Uncertaintyrelationsandcompatibility
Let M: S→ μS(dx) be a measurement with real values, to that μS(dx)
is a probability distribution on the real line R. The most important char-
acteristics of such distribution are the mean value and the variance
ES{M}=
∫
xμS(dx),
DS{M}=
∫
(x− ES{M})2μS(dx).
(2.6.60)
The variance is apparently a measure of the mean square deviation of a
random variable distributed according to μ
S(dx), from its mean value.
These quantities are well de/g192ned if, say,μS has a /g192nite second moment.
In this case we shall say that the measurement M has a /g192nite second
moment with respect to the state S.
By an observable in quantum mechanics one usually means a self-
adjoint operator in H ; however having in mind Theorem 2.4.3 we shall
extend the use of this term to arbitrary densely de/g192ned symmetric oper-
ator. By the spectral theorem to any observable X there corresponds a
(generally, non-unique) measurement M(dx), such that X =
∫
xM (dx).
As we shall see, the quantities (2.6.60) are the same for all spectral mea-
sures M(dx) of the operator X; for a pure state this follows directly from
(2.4.41), (2.4.42) and (2.4.50). Therefore we can call (2.6.60), corre-
spondingly, the mean E
S(X) and the variance DS(X) of the observable
X. Sometimes ES(X) will also be denoted X if it cannot cause a confu-
sion. For a pure state S= Sψ with ψ∈ D (X) we have3
ESψ (X)= (ψ|Xψ),
DSψ (X)=∥(X− ESψ (X))ψ∥2 =∥Xψ∥2− ESψ (X)2.
(2.6.61)
3 We shall sometimes drop the symbol I from the notation of an operator which is a multiple of
identity, so that X− ES(X) means X− ES(X)· I etc.

60 Alexander Holevo
Consider a pair of observables X1, X2 and a state S = Sψ such that
ψ∈ D (X1)∩ D (X2) assuming such a ψ̸=0 exists. For any real c
0≤∥(X1− X1)ψ− ic(X2− X2)ψ∥2
= DSψ (X1)+ 2c Im(X1ψ|X2ψ)+ c2 DSψ (X2),
(2.6.62)
whence
DSψ (X1)· DSψ (X2)≥| Im(X1ψ|X2ψ)|2, (2.6.63)
the equality being achieved if and only if for some c
[(X1− X1)+ ic(X2− X2)]ψ= 0; (2.6.64)
(weexcludeherethecase DSψ (X2)=0when c=∞). If X1,X2 are bounded,
then the right-hand side of (2.6.63) can be rewritten as1
4|ESψ (i[X1,X2])|2,
where
[X1, X2]= X1 X2− X2 X1 (2.6.65)
is the commutator of the operators X1, X2. The inequality (2.6.63) is
called the uncertainty relation. In Section 2.9 we shall prove a rigorous
and general version of this inequality for arbitrary states and measure-
ments with /g192nite second moments.
Sometimes it is asserted that the uncertainty relation sets a limitation
to the accuracy of “joint measurement” of the observablesX
1, X2. In fact
the statistical content of the uncertainty relation is different, and to show
this we shall analyze the notion of “joint measurability”.
In experimental practice it is common to measure several quantities
during one individual experiment. An outcome of such experiment can
be described by a collection of real numbers x
1,..., xn taking values in
some set /Lambda1. Thus mathematically the statistics of a joint measurement
must be described by a resolution of identity M(dx1···d xn) on /Lambda1⊂
Rn. It is customarily to speak of “simultaneous” measurements of several
quantities. What is relevant for the notion of joint measurement is not the
times at which the data x
1,..., xn are obtained but the fact that all of
them are obtained in a single individual experiment referred to a de/g192nite
initial state S. Whether the measurement is in fact “simultaneous” or
“repeated” will, of course, affect the measurement statistics but in any
case it is described by an af/g192ne mapS → μ
S(dx1 ...d xn) and hence
according to Theorem 2.2.1 by a resolution of identity M(dx1···d xn).
We call two real-valued measurements, Mj (dx j), x j ∈ R, j = 1, 2,
compatible if there exists a measurement M(dx, dx2) on R1 × R2 = R2
such that
M1(dx1)=
∫
R2
M(dx1 dx2), M2(dx2)=
∫
R1
M(dx1 dx2),

61 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
or, more precisely M1(B1)= M(B1×R2), B1 ∈ A (R1), and analogously
for M2(dx2). The measurement M(dx1 dx2) will be called a joint mea-
surement for Mj(dx j); j = 1, 2, and the latter will be called marginal
measurements for M(dx1 dx2).
Proposition2.6.1. The simple measurements E j (dx j); j = 1, 2,a r e
compatible if and only if
[E1(B1), E2(B2)]=0; Bj ∈ A (Rj); j= 1, 2. (2.6.66)
Proof. To prove suf/g192ciency de/g192ne the orthogonal resolution of identity
E on R1× R2 putting
E(B1× B2)= E1(B1)· E2(B2),
and extending E onto A (R1 × R2) in a standard way. Then Ej are the
marginal measurements for E.
To prove necessity assume that M is a joint measurement for Ej , j =
1, 2. Fix Bj ∈ A (Rj) and let B j denote the complement of Bj ; j= 1, 2.
Consider the following table
E1(B1)=M(B1× B2)+M(B1× B2)
++ +
E1(B1)=M(B1× B2)+M(B1× B2)
∥∥ ∥
I = E2(B2) + E2(B2),
where E1(B1)E1(B1)= E2(B2)E2(B2)= 0. Rewriting this in the form
[M(B1× B2)+ M(B1× B2)]·[ M(B1× B2)+ M(B1× B2)]
=[ M(B1× B2)+ M(B1× B2)]·[ M(B1× B2)+ M(B1× B2)]
= 0
and applying several times the Hilbert space generalization of Lemma
1.6.4 we obtain that the product of any two operatorsM(B
1×B2), M(B1×
B2), M(B1× B2), M(B1× B2) is equal to zero. It follows that
E1(B1)E2(B2)= M(B2× B2)2 = E2(B2)E1(B1)
and the proposition is proved.
Now let X j ; j = 1, 2, be observables represented by self-adjoint op-
erators and Ej be their spectral measures. The observables are called

62 Alexander Holevo
compatible (or jointly measurable) if Ej are compatible. We see that this
is the case if and only if the operators X j commute in the sense that their
spectral measures Ej satisfy the condition (2.6.66). One can show that
this is equivalent to the condition
[eiθ1 X1 , eiθ2 X2]=0; θ1,θ 2 ∈ R, (2.6.67)
on the unitary groups generated by X1, X2. If moreover X1, X2 are
bounded, then this is equivalent to
[X1, X2]=0.
These considerations extend to an arbitrary family of observables
X1, ..., Xn, represented by commuting self-adjoint operators. Let
E(dx1,···d xn) be the orthogonal resolution of identity presenting the
joint measurement of X1, ...,Xm (E(dx1···d xn)= E1(dx1)·...· En(dxn),
where E j(dx j ) are the spectral measures for X j ). Then one can develop
a functional calculus of X1,... Xn, putting
f (X1,..., Xn)=
∫
...
∫
f (x1,..., xn)E(dx1···d xn)
in a way analogous to the case of a single operator.
Returning to the uncertainty relation (2.6.63) we note that if the right-
hand side of (2.6.63) is nonzero, then X1 and X2 cannot commute. In-
deed, assuming X1, X2 commute we obtain from (2.6.67)
(e−iθ1 X1 ψ|eiθ2 X2 ψ)≡ (eiθ1 X1ψ|e−iθ2 X2ψ).
Differentiating with respect toθ1 and θ2 at θ1 = θ2 = 0 we get by (2.4.49)
Im(X1ψ|X2ψ)= 0 contrary to the assumption. Thus X1, X2 are incom-
patible and by Proposition 2.6.1 no joint measurement exists for X1 and
X2. Therefore it is senseless to say that (2.6.63) sets a limitation to the
accuracy of joint measurement. To give the proper statistical interpre-
tation one has to consider two large collections of copies of the object
prepared in the same state S. Then, if the observable X
1 is measured
in the /g192rst collection, andX2 in the second, the product of variance of
such independent measurements will satisfy (2.6.63). Otherwise assume
that one of the variances, say, D
S(X1) is known a priori from the de-
scription of the preparation procedure; then the measured value DS(X2)
will again satisfy (2.6.63). The two interpretations are closely connected
since evaluation of D
S(X1) by measuring X1 in the /g192rst collection can be
considered as a preliminary determination of a numerical characteristic
of the state S.
As we shall see later, the uncertainty relation is indeed connected with
a bound for accuracy of joint measurements but the connection is not so
straightforward.

63 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
2.7. Trace-classoperatorsandHilbert-Schmidtoperators 4
Consider bounded operators which have the diagonal form in a /g192xed or-
thonormal basis{e
j}
X=
∑
j
x j|ej)(ej|, (2.7.68)
where the series converges strongly. Any property of the sequence of
eigenvalues{x
j} corresponds to a property of the operator X. The norm
of X is equal to
∥X∥=sup
j
|x j|; (2.7.69)
X is Hermitean if and only if x j are all real, positivity of X corresponds
to x j ≥ 0 etc.
To any classical space of sequences there corresponds a space of op-
erators. Taking the Banach space c of all bounded sequences {x j} with
the sup norm (2.7.69) we obtain all bounded diagonal operators with the
operator norm. Restricting to a /g192nite number ofj we get the diagonal
/g192nite-rank operators. Note that the completion of the space of /g192nite se-
quences with respect to the sup norm give only the proper subspacec
0 of
c consisting of sequences{x j} tending to zero.
Other important space of sequences are l1 and l2, corresponding to the
norms
∥X∥1 =
∑
j
|x j|=Tr |X|,
where|X|=
√
X∗ X = ∑
j |x j||ej )(ej| for the operator X of the form
(2.7.68), and
∥X∥2 =
√∑
j
|x j|2 =
√
Tr X∗ X.
We are going to describe the noncommutative analogs of these spaces,
which do not require X to be of diagonal form in a /g192xed basis{e
j}.
We shall proceed by completing the space F(H ) of all /g192nite-rank op-
erators with respect to corresponding norms. The completion of F(H )
with respect to the operator norm ∥·∥is the space of compact (com-
pletely continuous) operators. We shall not discuss the properties of this
important class; what is essential here is that the following analog of the
/g192nite-dimensional spectral theorem holds:any compact Hermitean oper-
ator X has the spectral representation of the form (2.7.68), where{e
j} is
4 The material of Sections 2.7-2.10 will be used essentially only in Chapters 5, 6.

64 Alexander Holevo
the orthonormal basis of eigenvectors of X ,{x j} are the eigenvalues of
X. The sequence of eigenvalues of a compact Hermitean operator tends
to zero.
Now we are going to de/g192ne the operator analog of the spacel1.I f X is
Hermitean, then|X| is de/g192ned by (2.3.30); for any boundedX put
|X|=
√
X∗ X;
where X∗ X is (positive) Hermitean and therefore any continuous function
of it is a well-de/g192ned Hermitean operator. Since|X|2 = X∗ X, then for
all ψ∈ H
∥|X|ψ∥=∥Xψ∥. (2.7.70)
Observing that T ∈ F(H ) implies|T|∈F( H ) put
∥T1∥1 = Tr|T|. (2.7.71)
For any /g192nite-rank operatorsT , X
| Tr TX|≤∥T∥1·∥X∥. (2.7.72)
Indeed, since|T| is a /g192nite-rank Hermitean operator, there is an orthonor-
mal basis{ej} of eigenvectors of|T|. From (2.7.70)
∥Te j∥=∥|T|ej∥=(ej||T|ej),
so that
| Tr TX|=
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∑
j
(X∗ej|Te j)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐≤∥X
∗∥·
∑
j
∥Te j∥=∥X∥·∥T∥1.
Putting in (2.7.72) X = E where E is projection onto a /g192nite-dimen-
sional subspace containing all the vectors ϕj , ψj from the representation
T = ∑
j |ϕj )(ψj| we have TE = T ,∥E∥=1, so that
| Tr T|≤∥T∥1.
This shows that a natural domain of de/g192nition of trace would be the com-
pletion of F(
H ) with respect to the norm∥·∥1. We shall only state the
/g192nal result.
Theorem2.7.1. The relation (2.7.71) de/g192nes the norm onF(
H ); the
completion of F(H ) with respect to this norm is the Banach space
T1(H ) of trace-class operators satisfying ∥T∥1 = Tr|T| < ∞. The
unique continuous extension of the trace onto F1(H ) is given by
Tr T =
∑
j
(ej|Te j),
where the series converges to one and the same value for any basis{ej}.

65 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Any trace-class operator is compact. To show this notice that
∥T∥≤∥T∥1
for T ∈ F(H ) since by (2.7.70) and (2.1.8),
∥T∥=∥|T|∥=sup
ϕ̸=0
(ψ||T|ψ)
(ψ|ψ) ≤ Tr|T|.
Therefore the completion of F(H ) with respect to∥·∥1 is contained in
the completion with respect to∥·∥.
It follows that any Hermitean trace-class operator has the spectral rep-
resentation
T =
∑
j
tj|ej)(ej|, (2.7.73)
where the sum converges in the norm∥·∥1, since∑
j |tj|=Tr |T| <∞
and∥|ej)(ej|∥1 = 1. Also Tr T = ∑
j tj .
Putting
T+ =
∑
t j >0
tj|ej)(ej|, T− =−
∑
t j <0
tj|ej)(ej|,
we have
T = T+− T−, |T|= T+ + T−, (2.7.74)
so that
∥T∥1 = Tr T+ + Tr T− =∥T+∥1+∥T−∥1.
Any positive operator with /g192nite trace is trace-class and therefore has
the spectral representation (2.7.73) with tj ≥ 0. In particular (2.2.20)
holds for any density operator.
It is well known that the space of continuous linear functional (the dual
space) for l1 is the spacec. The following theorem is the noncommutative
analog of this fact. We denote byB(H ) the Banach space of all bounded
operators with the operator norm∥·∥.
Theorem2.7.2. If T is trace-class, X is a bounded operator, then T X
and X T are trace-class operators and (2.1.18), (2.7.72) hold for all such
T and X. For any X ∈ B(H ) the correspondence
T → Tr TX; T ∈ T1(H ) (2.7.75)
de/g192nes a continuous linear functional onT1(H ) with the norm equal to
∥X∥. Conversely any continuous linear function ofT1(H ) has this form.

66 Alexander Holevo
Thus[T1(H )]∗ = B(H ). Supplying with the subscript h the cor-
responding real Banach spaces of Hermitean operators we have also
[T
1
h
(H )]∗ = Bh(H ). The real linear functional (2.7.75) is positive,
i.e.,T r TX ≥ 0 for all T ∈ T1
h
(H ), T ≥ 0, if and only if X ≥ 0. This
can be proved as in Lemma 1.6.3. It follows thatT ≥ 0 and X≤ Y imply
Tr TX ≤ Tr TY .
Proof of Theorem 2.2.1. Now we have tools for this proof. Let S →
μS be a measurement. Consider the real linear span of the set of states
S(H ). Any linear combination T = ∑tj Sj of density operators is
apparently a Hermitean trace-class operator. Conversely, letT ∈ T1
h
(H );
then by (2.7.74)
T = t+ S+− t− S−,
where t± = Tr T±, S± = (t±)−1·T± are density operators. Thus the linear
span of S(H ) is the space T1
h
(H ) of Hermitean trace-class operators.
Fix a measurable set B and consider af/g192ne functionalS→ μS(B) on
S(H ). We construct a linear extension of it onto T1
h
(H ) by putting
μ(T)=
∑
j
tj μSj (B),
if T = ∑
j tj Sj . Correctness of this extension can be veri/g192ed as in /g192nite-
dimensional case (see Lemma 1.6.2). This functional is continuous since
|μ(T)|≤μ( T+)+ μ(T−)= t+μ(S+)+ t−μ(S−)
≤ t++ t− = Tr|T|=∥T∥1.
Therefore by the second part of Theorem 2.7.2 there exists a bounded
M(B) such that μ(T)= Tr TM (B), in particular μS(B)= Tr SM (B).
From 0 ≤ μS(B) ≤ 1, S ∈ S(H ), it follows that 0 ≤ M(B) ≤ I ,
and from μS(∅)= 0, μS(U)= I ; S ∈ S(H ), if follows that M(∅)=
0, M(U) = I . The proof of these facts is the same as in the /g192nite-
dimensional case and is based on the analog of Lemma 1.6.3.
To prove theσ -additivity (property (3) of resolution of identity in Sec-
tion 2.2) note that for any S the probability distribution is σ -additive in
B. Putting S= Sψ we have
(ψ|M(B)ψ)=
∑
j
(ψ|M(Bj)ψ)
for any decomposition {Bj} of B, and this means precisely the prop-
erty (3).

67 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Conversely let{M(B)} be a resolution of identity in H. Then the re-
lation (2.2.21) de/g192nes a family of af/g192ne functionals onS(H ) and one
needs only to check σ -additivity of μS, i.e., to prove that property (3)
implies
Tr SM (B)=
∑
j
Tr SM (Bj) (2.7.76)
for any density operator S. By the spectral representation (2.2.20) of S
Tr SM (B)=
∑
j
sj(ψj|M(B)ψj), (2.7.77)
where the right-hand side is the trace of SM (B) calculated in the basis
{ψ j} by the formula of Theorem 2.7.1. On the other hand by the σ -
additivity of{M(B)} we have
(ψj|M(B)ψj)=
∑
k
(ψj|M(Bk)ψj).
Multiplying it by sj , summing and changing the order of summation
which is possible due to nonnegativity of summands, we obtain (2.7.76).
The theorem is proved.
We can now also establish a useful relation
∫
f (x)μS(dx)= Tr Sf (X), (2.7.78)
where f is a bounded measurable function, X is a self-adjoint operator
with the spectral measure E(dx), μS(dx) = Tr SE (dx) and f (X) =∫
f (x)E(dx). Indeed using (2.7.77) we get
∫
f (x)μS(dx)=
∑
j
sj
∫
f (x)(ψj|E(dx)ψj)
=
∑
j
sj (ψj| f (X)ψj)= Tr Sf (X),
due to boundedness of f .
We now turn to the noncommutative analog of the l2 space. Introduce
the inner product in F(H )
(T1, T2)= Tr T∗
1 T2, (2.7.79)
with the norm∥T∥2 =
√
Tr T∗T .

68 Alexander Holevo
Theorem2.7.3. The completion of F(H ) with respect to the inner prod-
uct (2.7.79) is the Hilbert space T2(H ). The elements of this space,
called Hilbert-Schmidt operators, are bounded operators T satisfying
Tr T
∗T ≡ ∑
j ∥Te j∥2 < ∞ for an orthonormal basis in H . For any
T1,T 2 ∈ T2(H ) the product T1· T2 is trace-class operator and the inner
product of T1 and T2 is equal to Tr T∗
1 T2. The noncommutative analog of
the Cauchy inequality holds
∥T1· T2∥1 ≤∥T1∥2·∥T2∥2. (2.7.80)
The product of a bounded X and a Hilbert-Schmidt operator T (in any
order) is again Hilbert-Schmidt with
∥TX∥2 =∥XT∥2 ≤∥X∥·∥T∥2. (2.7.81)
The spaces of operators introduced above are related by following di-
agram
F(H )⊂ T1(H )⊂ T2(H )⊂ (compact operators).
To prove the last inclusion it is suf/g192cient to show that
∥T∥≤∥T∥2,
since this implies that the completion of F(H ) with respect to ∥·∥2 is
contained in the completion with respect to∥·∥. But
∥T∥2 =∥|T|∥2 = sup
ψ̸=0
∥|T|ψ∥2
∥ψ∥2 = sup
ψ̸=0
∥Tψ∥2
∥ψ∥2 ≤ Tr T∗T
and the result follows. In particular, any Hermitean Hilbert-Schmidt op-
erator has the spectral representation of the form (2.7.73) with
∥T∥
2 =
√∑
j
|tj|2 <∞.
Furthermore∥T∥2 ≤∥T∥1, since
Tr T∗T = Tr|T|2 =
∑
j
τ2
j ≤
⎫∑
j
τj
⎬2
= (Tr|T|)2.
It follows that any trace-class operator is Hilbert-Schmidt.
Finally let us consider Hilbert-Schmidt operators in L 2(a, b). Let for
simplicity T be a Hermitean operator with the spectral representation

69 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
(2.7.73) satisfying ∑
j t2
j < ∞. Its eigenfunctions {ej(x)} form an or-
thonormal basis in L 2(a, b). Consider the kernel
T(x′, x)=
∑
j
tj ej(x′)ej (x).
Since
∫
¯ej (x)ek(x)dx = δjk and ∑t2
j < ∞ this series converges in
L 2((a, b)× (a, b)) and de/g192nes a square-integrable function of two vari-
ables x, x′, satisfying
∫b
a
∫b
a
|T(x, x′)|2dx dx′=
∑
j
t2
j ≡ Tr T 2.
For any ψ∈ L 2(a, b)
Tψ(x′)=
∫b
a
T(x′, x)ψ(x)dx, (2.7.82)
as one sees, e.g., calculating the form (ϕ|Tψ) in the basis {ej}.I f T is
trace-class, the ∑|tj| <∞ and the function T(x, x)= ∑tj|ej (x)|2 is
integrable with ∫b
a
T(x, x)dx= Tr T. (2.7.83)
In Dirac’s notation the kernel T(x′, x) is expressed by the symbol
(x′|T|x) and may be regarded as a formal analog of the matrix elements
for the continual “basis” {|x)}; using the completeness relation (2.3.33)
one obtains formally
T =
∫∫
|x′)(x′|T|x)(x|dx′dx,
whence one gets Dirac’s version of (2.7.82):
(x′|Tψ)=
∫
(x′|T|x)(x|ψ)dx.
If T is Hilbert-Schmidt, then as we have seen the kernel (x′|T|x) is
a square-integrable function of x, x′, and these manipulations have a
straightforward mathematical substantiation.
2.8. L 2 spacesassociatedwithaquantumstate
Many important quantum observables are represented by unbounded op-
erators. Unboundedness is a source of serious technical dif/g192culties in the
noncommutative theory. For example, the de/g192nition of sum of random

70 Alexander Holevo
variables presents no dif/g192culties in probability theory, while the sum of
incompatible quantum observables may not be well de/g192ned. That we
have restricted only to pure states in the uncertainty relation (2.6.63) is
also due to dif/g192culties connected with unboundedness. We are going now
to elaborate a technique which will allow us to operate freely enough with
unbounded observables, in particular to calculate their /g192rst two moments
with respect to a state de/g192ned by an arbitrary density operatorS.
We shall introduce a noncommutative analog of the Hilbert space of
random variables with /g192nite second moment, which is an important con-
cept in ordinary probability theory. This Hilbert space of “square-sum-
mable” observables turns out to be a convenient tool also in quantum
theory; in particular there is no problem with the summation of such ob-
servables.
Let S be a /g192xed density operator andX, Y bounded operators in
H.
Put
X◦ Y = 1
2(XY + YX ). (2.8.84)
Assuming X, Y being Hermitean introduce the pre-inner product in
Bh(H )
⟨Y, X⟩S = Tr S(Y◦ X)≡ Re TrSY X, (2.8.85)
with
⟨X, X⟩S = Tr SX 2.
The completion of Bh(H ) with respect to ⟨·,·⟩S is a real Hilbert space
denoted by L 2
h
(S). The elements of L 2
h
(S) can be represented, generally,
by unbounded operators in H in the following way.
A symmetric operator X is called square-summable with respect
to the density operator S having the spectral representation (2.2.20) if∑
j sj∥Xψj∥2 <∞ (so that ψj ∈ D(X) if sj ̸=0). Two such operators
X1, X2 are equivalent if X1ψj = X2ψj for sj ̸=0. For square-summable
X, Y put
⟨Y, X⟩S =
∑
j
sj
1
2[(Yψj|Xψj)+ (Xψj|Yψj)]
≡ Re
∑
j
sj (Yψj|Xψj),
(2.8.86)
the series being convergent by the Cauchy inequality. If X and Y are
bounded, then they are square-summable and the sum (2.8.86) is equal to
(2.8.85), since it is just the trace calculated in the basis{ψ
j}.
Theorem2.8.1. The elements of L 2
h
(S) can be naturally identi/g192ed with
the equivalence classes of square-summable operators with the inner

71 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
product de/g192ned by(2.8.86); namely, if {Xn} is a Cauchy sequence with
respect to the pre-inner product (2.8.85) in Bh(H ), then there is a
square-summable X such that limn⟨Xn − X, Xn − X⟩=0, and con-
versely any square-summable operator is a limit of a Cauchy sequence
{X
n}⊂B (H ).
The proof of this theorem is omitted. In what follows we shall denote
by the same letter X both a square-summable operator and a correspond-
ing element of L 2
h
(S).
Using the notion of Hilbert-Schmidt operator we can give an alterna-
tive description of square-summable operators. Consider the operator
√
S=
∑
j
√sj|ψj)(ψj|,
which is apparently Hilbert-Schmidt since Tr (
√
S)2 < ∞. Introducing
the notation R(T) for the range of an operator T ,w eh a v e
R(
√
S)=
{
ψ: ψ=
∑
j
√sj cj ψj,
∑
j
|cj|2 <∞
}
.
Proposition2.8.2. Operator X with D (X) ∋ψj for s j ̸=0 is square-
summable if and only if X extends to R(
√
S) so that X
√
S is Hilbert-
Schmidt. Moreover
⟨Y, X⟩S = Tr 1
2[(Y
√
S)∗(X
√
S)+ (X
√
S)∗(Y
√
S)]
= Re Tr(Y
√
S)∗(X
√
S).
(2.8.87)
Proof. If X is a square-summable, then the extension is given by
X
⎫∑
j
√sj cj ψj
⎬
=
∑
j
√sj cj Xψj ,
∑
j
|cj|2 <∞,
the series converging strongly by the square-summability. The operator
X
√
S is Hilbert-Schmidt since
Tr(X
√
S)∗(X
√
S)=
∑
j
∥X
√
Sψj∥2 =
∑
j
sj∥Xψj∥2 <∞.
The relation (2.8.87) follows from (2.8.86) in the same way. The converse
statement is obvious.

72 Alexander Holevo
We now give one more useful formula for the inner product. Since
by Theorem 2.7.3 a product of Hilbert-Schmidt operators is a trace-class
operator, the expression
X◦ S≡
1
2[(X
√
S)·
√
S+
√
S· (X
√
S)∗]
de/g192nes a trace-class operator inH. Using (2.1.18) we obtain
⟨Y, X⟩S = Tr(X◦ S)Y, (2.8.88)
for a bounded Y and X∈ L 2
h
(S).
The speci/g192c feature of the noncommutative case is the existence of an
additional skew-symmetric form in L 2
h
(S) related to the commutator of
operators. If X, Y are Hermitean, then i[Y, X] is also Hermitean. There-
fore the relation
[Y, X]S = iT rS[Y, X]=2I mT r SXY (2.8.89)
de/g192nes a real bilinear form onBh(H ). It can be extended to L 2
h
(S) by
the equivalent relations
[Y, X]S = 2I m
∑
j
sj(Xψj|Yψj )= 2I mT r(X
√
S)∗(Y
√
S),
analogous to (2.8.86), (2.8.87). If X∈ L 2
h
(S), then the relation
[X, S]≡( X
√
S)·
√
S−
√
S· (X
√
S)∗
determines a trace-class operator. Using again (2.1.18) we obtain for
bounded Y
[Y, X]
S = iT r[X, S]·Y . (2.8.90)
The form is skew-symmetric, i.e.,
[X, Y]S =−[ Y, X]S; X, Y ∈ L 2
h
(S).
If follows that
[X, X]S = 0, X∈ L 2
h
(S). (2.8.91)
From (2.8.90) with Y = I and (2.1.18) we obtain also
[I, X]S = 0, X∈ L 2
h
(S). (2.8.92)
We shall also use the complexi/g192cation ofL 2
h
(S). Any bounded X can
be uniquely presented in the form X = X1 + iX2 where X1, X2 are
Hermitean. Namely, one obtains
X1 = 1
2(X+ X∗), X2 = 1
2i(X− X∗).

73 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Put
⟨Y, X⟩S = Tr S(Y∗ ◦ X)= Tr(S◦ X)· Y∗ (2.8.93)
for X, Y ∈ B(H ). Then it is easy to see that
⟨X, X⟩S =⟨X1, X1⟩S +⟨X2, X2⟩S. (2.8.94)
Denote by L 2(S) the completion of B(H ) with respect to the pre-inner
product (2.8.93). Then any X ∈ L 2(S) still can be written in the form
X = X1 + iX2 with X1, X2 ∈ L 2
h
(S), so that (2.8.94) holds. This is
expressed by saying that L 2(S) is the complexi/g192cationof L 2
h
(S), and is
written as
L 2(S)= L 2
h
(S)⊕ iL 2
h
(S).
The real bilinear skew-symmetric form (2.8.89) extends to the complex
sesquilinear skew-Hermitean form, which is given onB(
H ) by the rela-
tions
[Y, X]S = iT rS[Y∗, X]=iT r [X, S]· Y∗. (2.8.95)
Other two useful complex pre-inner products on B(H ) are
⟨Y, X⟩+
S = Tr SXY∗, ⟨Y, X⟩−
S = Tr SY∗ X. (2.8.96)
Since ⟨Y, X⟩S = 1
2[⟨Y, X⟩+
S +⟨Y, X⟩−
S], then ⟨X, X⟩±
S ≤ 2⟨X, X⟩S.
Therefore denoting by L 2
±
(S) the completions of B(H ) with respect
to the pre-inner products (2.8.96) we have L 2(S)⊆ L 2
±
(S). Obviously
⟨X, Y⟩S ± i
2[X, Y]S =⟨X, Y⟩±
S;
[X, Y]S = i(⟨X, Y⟩−
S −⟨X, Y⟩+
S ); X, Y ∈ L 2(S).
(2.8.97)
Proposition2.8.3. The forms⟨·,·⟩S and[·,·]S are related by the follow-
ing equivalent inequalities:
(1) ⟨X, X⟩
S ≥ i
2[X, X]S; X∈ L 2(S);
(2) ⟨X, X⟩S ≥− i
2[X, X]S; X∈ L 2(S);
(3) ⟨X1, X1⟩S +⟨X2, X2⟩S ≥[ X1, X2]S; X1, X2 ∈ L 2
h
(S);
(4) ⟨X1, X1⟩S ·⟨X2, X2⟩S ≥ 1
4[X1, X2]2
S; X1, X2 ∈ L 2
h
(S).
Proof. The inequalities (1), (2) follow from
⟨X, X⟩S ± i
2[X, X]S =⟨X, X⟩±
S ≥ 0, X∈ L 2(S).

74 Alexander Holevo
They are equivalent since ⟨X, X⟩+
S =⟨X∗, X∗⟩−
S , X ∈ B(H ).L e t
X ∈ L 2(S), then X = X1 + iX2 with X j ∈ L 2
h
(S) whence taking into
account (2.8.91) and (2.8.96) we get
0≤⟨X, X⟩−
S =⟨X1, X1⟩S +⟨X2, X2⟩S −[ X1, X2]S.
It follows that (1) is equivalent to (3). Inserting in (3) tX 1 in place of X1
we obtain
t2⟨X1, X1⟩S − t[X1, X2]S +⟨X2, X2⟩S ≥ 0, t∈ R,
which is equivalent to (4).
It follows from (1), (2) that for any X1,..., Xn ∈ L 2
h
(S)
[⟨X j, Xk⟩S]≥± i
2[[X j, Xk]S], (2.8.98)
where on the left is a real symmetricn×n-matrix, and on the right is±1
2 i
by a real skew-symmetric (n× n)-matrix, both sides being considered as
Hermitean (n× n)-matrices.
Later we shall need the complex extension of inequality (4):
⟨X1, X1⟩S⟨X2, X2⟩S ≥ 1
4|[X1, X2]S|2; X1, X2 ∈ L 2(S). (2.8.99)
To prove it we /g192rst remark that (3) implies
⟨X1, X1⟩S +⟨X2, X2⟩S ≥ Re[X1, X2]S for X1, X2 ∈ L 2(S).
Then as in the proof of Proposition 2.8.3
⟨X1, X1⟩S⟨X2, X2⟩S ≥ 1
4(Re[X1 X2]S)2.
Replacing X1 by λX1 with λ=[ X1, X2]S·|[ X1, X2]S|−1 we get (2.8.99).
2.9. Uncertaintyrelationsformeasurements
with/g192nitesecondmoments
In probability theory the elements ofL 2 space are random variables with
/g192nite second moment. In the noncommutative case there is a correspon-
dence between the elements of
L 2
h
(S) and the real-valued measurements
with /g192nite second moment.
Let /g192rstX be an observable with /g192nite second moment with respect to
S which is represented by a densely de/g192ned symmetric operator. Then
X∈ L 2
h
(S) since the quantity
∑
j
sj∥Xψj∥2 =
∑
j
sj
∫
λ2(ψj|M(dλ)ψj)=
∫
λ2μS(dλ)

75 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
is /g192nite. We have used Theorem 2.4.3 in the /g192rst equality and positiveness
and (2.7.77) in the second. In the same way we can prove
E
S(X)=⟨I, X⟩S, (2.9.100)
DS(X)=⟨X− ES(X), X− ES(X)⟩S. (2.9.101)
If X is bounded, we get from (2.7.78)
ES(X)= Tr SX , (2.9.102)
DS(X)= Tr S(X− ES(X))2, (2.9.103)
which agrees with (2.9.100), (2.9.101).
Let X1, X2 be observables with /g192nite second moment with respect to
S. Applying the inequality (4) of Proposition 2.8.3 to X1 − ES(X1) and
X2− ES(X2) and taking into account (2.8.92) we obtain a generalization
of the uncertainty relation (2.6.63) in the form
DS(X1)· DS(X2)≥ 1
4[X1, X2]2
S. (2.9.104)
Now let M={ M(dx)} be an arbitrary real-valued measurement such
that ∫
x2μS(dx)<∞
with μS(dx)= Tr SM (dX). We shall de/g192ne an integral
XM =
∫
xM (dx),
converging in L 2
h
(S), so that the mean and the variance of the measure-
ment M de/g192ned in (2.6.60) are evaluated throughXM by the relations
ES{M}=⟨I, XM⟩, (2.9.105)
DS{M}≥⟨XM − ES{M}, XM − ES{M}⟩S, (2.9.106)
resembling (2.9.100), (2.9.101).
We proceed to de/g192ne the integral of the type (2.9.104) /g192rst for simple
real-valued function
f (x)=
∑
j
f j1Bj (x)
by the relation ∫
f (x)M(dx)=
∑
j
f j M(Bj ).

76 Alexander Holevo
Then the inequality holds:
[∫
f (x)M(dx)
]2
≤
∫
f (x)2 M(dx). (2.9.107)
Indeed for the simple f this means
[∑
j
f j M(Bj)
]2
≤
∑
j
f 2
j M(Bj),
and follows directly from
∑
j
[
f j −
∑
k
fk M(Bk)
]
M(Bj)
[
f j −
∑
k
fk M(Bk)
]
≥ 0.
Multiplying (2.9.107) by S, taking trace and using (2.8.85) we get
⟨∫
f (x)M(dx),
∫
f (x)M(dx)
⟩
S
≤
∫
f (x)2μS(dx). (2.9.108)
Now let f be square-integrable with respect to μS(dx) and{ fn} be a
sequence of simple functions such that
∫
( fn(x)− f (x))2μS(dx)→ 0.
Applying (2.9.108) to the simple functions fn − fm we see that
{∫
fn(x)M(dx)
}
is a Cauchy sequence of bounded operators in L 2
h
(S). Therefore it has
the limit in L 2
h
(S) which we denote as
∫
f (x)M(dx). Moreover, the
inequality (2.9.108) extends to any f , square-integrable with respect to
μS(dx).
If we proceed with complex-valued functions f and the inner products
⟨·,·⟩±
S , the integral
∫
f (x)M(dx) will be an element of L 2
±
(S) and the
inequality (2.9.108) will change to
⟨∫
f (x)M(dx),
∫
f (x)M(dx)
⟩±
S
≤
∫
| f (x)|2μS(dx). (2.9.109)

77 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Therefore we have proved
Proposition2.9.1. For any real-(complex)-valued f ∈
L 2(μS) the in-
tegral
∫
f (x)M(dx) is de/g192ned as the limit inL 2
h
(S)( correspondingly
in L 2
±
(S)) of the sequence{
∫
fn(x)M(dx)}, where{ fn} is any sequence
of simple functions converging to f in L 2(μS). For any real f ∈ L 2(μS)
the inequality (2.9.108) holds; for any f ∈ L 2(μS) the inequality
(2.9.109) holds.
To prove (2.9.106) we have only to putf (x)= x−ES{M} in (2.9.108).
The relation (2.9.105) follows from the more general relation
∫
f (x)μS(dx)=
⟨
I,
∫
f (x)M(dx)
⟩
S
,
which is obvious for simple f ’s and extends to f ∈ L 2(μs) by a standard
limiting argument.
From (2.9.106) and Proposition 2.8.3(4) we obtain the most general
form of the uncertainty relation
DS{M1}· DS{M2}≥ 1
4[XM1 , XM2]2,
which holds for any measurements M1, M2 with /g192nite second moment.
In contrast to (2.6.63) and (2.9.104) it applies also to joint measurements
when M
1(dx1) and M2(dx2) are marginal measurements with respect to
some M(dx1, dx2).
2.10. Matrixrepresentationofsquare-summableoperators.
Thecommutationoperatorofastate
Elements of a L 2 space can be naturally represented by in/g192nite matrices.
Assume /g192rst for simplicity that the stateS is exact. This means that the
density operator is nondegenerated, i.e., has all eigenvaluessj > 0. Then
the family of the matrix units
E jk =| ψj )(ψk|
where{ψj} is the orthonormal basis of eigenvectors of S in H form an
orthogonal basis in L 2
±
(S), L 2(S) with
⟨E jk , E jk⟩+
S = sj , ⟨E jk , E jk⟩−
S = sk,
⟨E jk , E jk⟩S = 1
2(sj + sk).

78 Alexander Holevo
We shall prove it only for L 2(S). For any X∈ L 2(S) we have
⟨E jk , X⟩S = 1
2(sj + sk)(ψj|Xψk)
by (2.8.86). It follows that ⟨E jk , E j′k′⟩S = δjj′· δkk′. The completeness
of the system{E jk} follows from the fact that⟨E jk , X⟩S = 0 for all j, k
implies Xψk = 0 for all k, i.e., X= 0i n L 2(S).
Therefore an arbitrary square-summable operator X is represented by
the series
X=
∑
jk
x jk E jk =
∑
jk
|ψj)(ψj|Xψk)(ψk|, (2.10.110)
where
x jk = (ψj|Xψk)= ⟨E jk , X⟩S
⟨E jk , E jk⟩S
,
and the series converges in L 2(S). This is an extension of the matrix
representation (2.1.13) to unbounded operators.
Consider now the real space L 2
h
(S). The representation (2.10.110)
holds for X ∈ L 2
h
(s) but E jk do not belong to L 2
h
(S) unless j = k and
x jk are in general complex numbers. Introducing
C jk = 1
2(E jk + Ekj )∗, Sjk = 1
2i(E jk − E∗
jk ),
one checks that {C jk , j ≤ k; Sjk , j < k} form an orthogonal basis in
L 2
h
(S) and for X∈ L 2
h
(S)
X=
∑
j≤k
αjk C jk +
∑
j<k
βjk Sjk ,
with real αjk , βjk .
Now let S be an arbitrary density operator. We shall denote by J0 the
set of indices j for which sj = 0 and by J1 the remaining set. Then S can
be represented by the diagonal block matrix
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
s
1 0... sj 0...0
00
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
.
Consider /g192rstL 2
+
(S). Since ⟨E jk , E jk⟩+
S = 0 for j ∈ J0, then the or-
thogonal basis in L 2
+
(S) consists of operators{E jk ; j∈ J1, k∈ J0∪ J1}.

79 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Therefore any element of L 2
+
(S) can be represented by the block matrix
of the form
X=
[X11 X10
∼ ∼
]
,
where the blocks X11, X10 corresponding to the rows with the indices
j ∈ J1 are determined by X and the remaining blocks denoted by wavy
lines are arbitrary (and can be made zero). Similarly, the elements of
L 2
−
(S) can be represented by the matrices of the form
X=
[X11 ∼
X01 ∼
]
.
Turning to the matrix representation of the elements ofL 2(S) we observe
that⟨E jk , E jk⟩S = 0 if and only if j, k ∈ J0, so that the basis in L 2(S)
consists of{E jk ; ( j, k)/∈ J0× J0}. Therefore the elements of L 2(S) are
represented by matrices
X=
[X11 X10
X01 ∼
]
.
For X∈ L 2
h
(S) the matrix is Hermitean so that X∗
11 = X11, X∗
10 = X01.
Especially simple is the case of the pure state S=| ψ1)(ψ1|. Then the
elements of L 2
+
(S) can be represented by in/g192nite row vectors
X=
[x11x12···
∼
]
,
∑
j
|x1 j|2 <∞.
If we take the inessential part of the matrix equal to zero, then we have
X =| ψ1)(ψ|, ψ ∈ H so that L 2
+
(S) is naturally isomorphic to the
space H∗ of continuous linear functionals on H. Similarly the elements
of L 2(S) are represented by
X=
⎡
⎢
⎣
x
11
x21 ∼
.
.
.
⎤
⎥
⎦
i.e., we can take X =| ψ)(ψ
1|, ψ ∈ H, so that L 2
−
(S) naturally isomor-
phic to H. For the elements of L 2(S) we have representation
X=
⎡
⎢
⎣
x
11 x12···
x21 ∼
.
.
.
⎤
⎥
⎦ , (2.10.111)

80 Alexander Holevo
i.e., X =| ψ1)(ϕ|+| ψ)(ψ1|, ϕ, ψ ∈ H. Elements of L 2
h
(S) are repre-
sented by Hermitean matrices of the form (2.10.111), i.e.,
X=| ψ1)(ψ|+| ψ)(ψ1|,ψ ∈ H. (2.10.112)
We are now going to introduce an important notion of commutation op-
erator of a state which will be very useful in the statistical theory of
Chapters 5, 6. It follows from Proposition 2.8.3 that the form [·,·]
S is
continuous on L 2(S). Therefore it can be represented as
[Y, X]S =⟨Y, D· X⟩S, (2.10.113)
where D is a (complex)-linear bounded operator inL 2(S). It is called the
commutation operator of S. Since[·,·]S is skew-Hermitean, the operator
D is skew-Hermitean, i.e. D∗ =− D. The inequalities (1) and (2) of
Proposition 2.8.3 then can be written as
1± i
2 D≥ 0i n L 2(S). (2.10.114)
It follows that
⎫
1+ 1
4 D2
⎬
=
⎫
1+ i
2 D
⎬⎫
1− i
2 D
⎬
≥ 0.
Since the forms⟨·,·⟩S and[·,·]S are real on the real subspace L 2
h
(S),
this subspace is invariant under the operatorD. Considered as an operator
in L 2
h
(S) it is a (real)-linear bounded skew-symmetric operator satisfying
1+ 1
4 D2 ≥ 0. The equation (2.8.92) implies
D· I = 0. (2.10.115)
To describe the action of the operator D more explicitly we /g192rst ob-
serve that for bounded X, Y (2.10.113) implies via (2.8.88) and (2.8.90)
iT r[X, S]Y∗ = Tr((D· X)◦ S)Y∗.
If follows that Z= D· X∈ L 2(S) is the solution of the equation
Z◦ S= i[X, S]. (2.10.116)
It is convenient to solve this equation using the matrix representation
(2.10.110). Applying both sides of (2.10.116) to ψk and taking the inner
product with ψj we obtain
1
2(sk + sj )(ψj|Zψk)= i(sk − sj )(ψj|Xψk),

81 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
whence we get the matrix elements of Z= D· X
(ψj|Zψk)= 2i(sk − sj )
(sk + sj) (ψj|Xψk).
Therefore the action of D is expressed by multiplication of matrix ele-
ments x jk = (ψj|Xψk) of X by 2i(sk − sj )(sk + sj)−1:
D([x jk])=
[2i(sk − sj)
(sk + sj ) x jk
]
. (2.10.117)
The basis{E jk} is thus the basis of eigenvectors of D in L 2(S). There-
fore for any function f the action of the operator f (D) is described by
the relation
f (D)([x jk])=
[
f
⎫2i(sk − sj)
(sk + sj )
⎬
x jk
⎬]
.
In particular we shall need the following functions
⎫
1+ i
2 D
⎬
([x jk])=
[ 2sj
sk + sj
x jk
]
,
⎫
1− i
2 D
⎬
([x jk])=
[ 2sk
sk + sj
x jk
]
,
⎫
1+ 1
4 D2
⎬
([x jk])=
[ 2sksj
(sk + sj)2 x jk
]
.
(2.10.118)
From these relations follows
Proposition2.10.1. The state S is exact if and only if any of operators
1±
1
2 iD, 1+ 1
4 D2 is nondegenerated.
Assuming the condition of the proposition to hold we have the relation
⎫
1± i
2 D
⎬−1
=
⎫
1+ 1
4 D2
⎬−1 ⎫
1∓ i
2 D
⎬
. (2.10.119)
2.11. Comments
Section 2.1. For systematic exposition of the operator theory in a Hilbert
space see Stone [129], Akhiezer and Glazman [2], Riesz and Sz-Nagy
[119]. A modernized course of functional analysis adapted for applica-
tions in mathematical physics is given by Reed and Simon [118]. Rich
complementary material can be found in Halmos [48]. In mathematical
texts the outer product sometimes is denoted by a less expressive symbol
¯ϕ⊗ ψ.

82 Alexander Holevo
Section 2.2. Introduced /g192rst in a somewhat implicit form by Carleman
the general resolutions of identity (on R) were extensively studied by
Naimark [100, 101]. Theorem 2.2.1 is proved in [59].
Section 2.3-2.4. Proofs of the spectral theorems for Hermitean and self-
adjoint operators can be found in the aforementioned textbooks. They are
related to the names of Hilbert, von Neumann, Stone, Riesz and others.
The spectral theorem for symmetric operators is due to Naimark [100]
(see also Akhiezer and Glazman [2]). The formal Dirac’s expansions over
continuous systems of “eigenvectors” can be founded in the framework
of rigged Hilbert spaces (see Gelfand and Vilenkin [40] and Bogoljubov,
Logunov and Todorov [16]).
Section 2.5. Theorem 2.5.1 was proved by Naimark [101]. Our argu-
ment patterns more modern proofs ( cf. Akhiezer and Glazman [2]). For
tensor products of Hilbert space see e.g. Reed and Simon [118].
The concept of realization and its relations to Naimark’s theorem and
to randomized procedures of mathematical statistics were discussed in
author’s papers [57, 59, 64]. A different opportunity for emergence of
nonorthogonal resolutions of identity (in physical language “overcom-
plete systems”) is related to the so called indirect measurements (Man-
delstam [95], Gordon and Louisell [44]). Under an indirect measurement
the object
H interacts with the “measuring apparatus” H1 which is ini-
tially in some state S1; then a simple measurement over H1 is performed.
One can readily see that the statistics of such indirect measurement is also
described by the generally nonorthogonal resolution of identity in
H (cf.
Kraus [80]).
We do not touch the important question of a mechanism which trans-
fers information from a microscopic level in the process of measurement.
This should be described quantum-mechanically as an interaction be-
tween the object and the measuring apparatus. A fruitful point of view is
to consider the apparatus as a “macroscopic system”, i.e., a system with
a very large number of degrees of freedom. The interaction is then prop-
erly treated in the framework of quantum statistical mechanics and the
phenomenological description of measurements can be recovered (see
Daneri, Loinger and Prosperi [25]). One further step is to assume that
the apparatus is a system with in/g192nitely many degrees of freedom. Such
systems are described by algebras of observables for which there exist
the so called disjoint, i.e., “macroscopically distinguishable” states. In-
teraction with the object drives the apparatus in one of the disjoint states
labelled by the different values u of the result of the measurement. In
the paper of Hepp [54] a number of interesting models of measurement

83 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
processes are considered which convincingly corroborate this point of
view.
Section 2.6. The formal uncertainty relation D(X)D(Y) ≥
1
4[X, Y]2
for arbitrary X, Y was established by Robertson [120], who general-
ized the Heisenberg uncertainty relation for position and momentum ob-
servables (see Section 3.3). Proposition 2.6.1 is proved in Davies’ book
[27]. The problem of compatibility and joint measurement has been dis-
cussed from various points of views by von Neumann [138], Urbanik
[133], Varadarajan [135] and many others. For the functional calcu-
lus of several commuting self-adjoint operators see Riesz and Sz.-Nagy
[119].
Section 2.7. Trace-class and Hilbert-Schmidt operators are considered
in Schatten [122], Gelfand and Vilenkin [40], Reed and Simon [118].
Section 2.8. The
L 2(S) spaces were introduced by Holevo [63,65] for a
normal state of a von Neumann algebra where Theorem 2.8.1 was proved.
The notion of square-summable operator appeared /g192rst in Holevo [59]
and Kraus and Shr¨oter [81].
Section 2.9. The rigorous uncertainty relation for a self-adjoint operator
was obtained by Kraus and Schr¨oter [81]. The construction of the integral∫
f (x)M(dx) is given in Holevo [65].
Section 2.10. The matrix representation of unbounded operators meets
well-known dif/g192culties (seee.g.Akhiezer and Glazman [2]). The con-
tents of this section show that if only “second moments” of the operator
are concerned, then a satisfactory matrix representation exists. The com-
mutation operator was introduced by Holevo [63, 65] for a normal state
on a von Neumann algebra. There is a simple relation between the com-
mutation operator D and the modular operator /Delta1of the Tomita-Takesaki
theory [132]; namely /Delta1= (1+
1
2 iD)(1− 1
2 iD)−1. For an exact S on
B(H ) this follows from (2.10.118) and the fact that /Delta1· X= SXS−1.



Chapter 3
Symmetry groups
in quantum mechanics
3.1. StatisticalmodelandGalileanrelativity
The spatially-temporal structure which we are going to introduce is a
distinctive feature in the description of mechanical objects. In classical
mechanics the motion of point masses is described in a frame of refer-
ence which consists of a spatial Cartesian coordinate system and a clock.
The distinguished class is formed by the so called inertial frames which
are characterized by the property that a free point mass performs uniform
rectilinear motion with respect to such a frame. It follows that the co-
ordinates (
ξ, τ) and (ξ′,τ′) of a point mass in any two inertial frames of
reference are related by the Galilei transformation
ξ′= Rξ+ x+ vτ, τ′+ τ+ t, (3.1.1)
where R is an orthogonal matrix (rotation) which describes the orienta-
tion of the new spatial axes with respect to the old ones,x is the vector of
the spatial shift of the origin, v is the relative velocity, and τ is the time
shift showing the difference between the readings of the two clocks.
All transformations of the form (3.1.1) constitute the Galilean group
which contains the subgroup of kinematical transformations
ξ′= Rξ+ x+ vτ, τ′= τ, (3.1.2)
and the Euclidean group of spatial transformations
ξ′= Rξ+ x.
The fundamental Galilean relativity principle says that the laws of me-
chanics are the same in all inertial frames or, mathematically, the equa-
tions of motion are invariant under all transformations of the form (3.1.1).
Of course, this refers only to a free object; if the motion occurs in a /g192eld
of a force, then the full Galilean relativity should be replaced by a re-
stricted one which takes into account symmetry properties of the /g192eld.

86 Alexander Holevo
For example, equations of motion in a time-independent /g192eld must be
invariant with respect to all transformations
ξ′= ξ+ vτ, τ′= τ+ t.
If the /g192eld is rotationally invariant, then the rotationsξ′= Rξ should be
added etc.
Turning to quantum mechanics, we adopt that Galilean relativity holds
also for microobjects. But we cannot take the formulation of the principle
literally since the notion of point mass becomes meaningless. Given now
are not coordinates (
ξ, τ) of point masses but the totality of statistical
results of various measurements. Therefore an appropriate preliminary
formulation of the Galilean relativity principle is: the statistics of any
experiment is the same in any inertial frame of reference.
To give a more precise formulation consider a device which prepares
a state S of the object. Then a measurement M is performed with the
resulting probability distribution μ
M
S . Both the preparing and the mea-
suring devices are macroscopic objects and we can associate with them
the frame of reference (
ξ, τ) (Figure 3.1). Assume now that the frame
(ξ, τ) is transformed by means of a Galilean transformation g into the
new frame (ξ′, τ′), the whole experimental set-up being the same in this
new frame. Preparation of the state S with the subsequent change in
the position of the preparing device can be considered as a new way of
preparation which results in the new state gS ; in the same way the mea-
surement M accomplished after the transformation g can be considered
as a new measurement gM. Since the whole experimental set-up remains
relatively unchanged we must have
μ
gM
gS = μM
S , (3.1.3)
for all states S and measurements M.
ξ1 ξ1
ξ2 ξ2
ξ3 ξ3τ τ
S
~ ~
~
~
μS
M
M
Figure3.1.

87 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Assuming full equivalence of all inertial frames of reference we must
adopt that S → gS is a one-to-one map of the set of states S onto S
(and correspondingly for M → gM). We do not require for the present
that S = S(H ); all that we need is that the statistical model (S, M)
is separated. If follows then that the map S → gS is af/g192ne; letS =∑
j pj Sj , then
μgM
gS = μM
S =
∑
j
pjμM
Sj =
∑
j
pjμgM
gS j .
Since the measurements gM constitute all M, gS = ∑
j pj(gS j ) what is
asserted. An af/g192ne one-to-one map of the set of statesS onto S is called
an automorphism of S.
It is natural to assume that a successive application of transformations
g1, g2 is equivalent to the transformation g1g2, so that
g1(g2 S)= (g1g2)S,
g1(g2M)= (g1g2)M. (3.1.4)
This means, /g192rst, that the groupG ={ g} acts as a group of automor-
phisms of the set of states S and, second, as a group of one-to-one
transformations of the set of measurements M. Moreover the actions are
connected by the requirement (3.1.3). This constitutes the mathematical
formulation of the relativity principle.
By group G we have meant the Galilean group and the statistical model
was one of quantum theory. However, the group could be any other sym-
metry group, i.e., a group of transformations of an appropriate set. In
particular, if the Galilean group is replaced by the Poincar ´e group the
Galilean relativity cedes to Einstein relativity.
So far we have not used the speci/g192city of the quantum statistical model.
The following theorem going back to Wigner, reveals the structure of
automorphisms of the set S(
H ).
Theorem3.1.1. Any automorphism of the set of quantum states S(H )
has the form
S→ VS V∗, (3.1.5)
where V is a unitary or anti-unitary operator in the Hilbert space H.
(An operator V from H onto H is called anti-unitary if it is conjugate-
linear and satis/g192es(Vϕ|Vψ)= (ϕ|ψ).)
It is important to note that the map (3.1.5) determines the operator V
only up to a scalar factor of unit modulus: V can be multiplied by an
ω ∈ C,|ω|=1, without changing the state VS V∗. Now let G act as

88 Alexander Holevo
a group of automorphisms of S(H ). By Theorem 3.1.1 for any g∈ G
there is a unitary or anti-unitary operatorVg in H such that gS = Vg SV∗
g .
Moreover, by (3.1.4)
Vg2 Vg1 SV∗
g1 V∗
g2 = Vg2g1 SV∗
g2g1; g1, g2 ∈ G,
for all S ∈ S(H ). It follows that there is a complex-valued function
ω(g1, g2), with|ω(g1, g2)|≡1 such that
Vg2 Vg1 = ω(g2, g2)Vg2g1; g1g2 ∈ G. (3.1.6)
The groups we shall consider are continuous groups in the sense that
they have a natural topological structure de/g192ning the notions of neigh-
borhood, convergence etc. We shall assume that the map g → V
g is
continuous1 in the sense that g′→ g implies (ϕ|Vgψ) → (ϕ|Vgψ) for
all ϕ, ψ ∈ H. We shall always put Ve = I , where e is the unit of the
group G. Assume at last that the group G is connected, i.e., any two ele-
ments of G can be connected by a continuous curve lying in G. Then all
operators Vg are unitary – otherwise it would be possible to pass continu-
ously from the unitary operator Ve = I to an anti-unitary operator, which
is clearly impossible.
A family of unitary operators g → Vg; g ∈ G in a Hilbert space H,
satisfying (3.1.6) is called projective unitary representationof G in H.I f
ω≡ 1 it is called simply unitary. We shall consider only representations
which are continuous in the aforementioned sense.
One of the principal problems of the theory of group representations is
classi/g192cation of all representations of a given group. Having such a clas-
si/g192cation for a symmetry groupG one can describe all theoretically pos-
sible quantum objects with this type of symmetry. Of special importance
are irreducible representations g → V
g, characterized by the property
that the only invariant closed subspaces of all operators {Vg; g∈ G} are
[0] and H. This means that the representation has no proper subrepresen-
tations and in this sense is minimal. Under certain regularity assumptions
any representation can be decomposed into a discrete or continuous sum
(integral) of irreducible representations.
According to Wigner an irreducible representation of a symmetry group
describes a “elementary system” with this type of symmetry. We may call
it also “elementary object”, but one should take care of the far-reaching
1 It is not a serious restriction: there is a theorem that Borel measurability of all functions(ϕ|V(·)ψ),
ϕ, ψ∈ H, together with (3.1.6) implies continuity.

89 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
associations with “elementary particles” of quantum physics and remem-
ber that elementary system or object is essentially a mathematical con-
cept. A complete answer to the question – what is an elementary particle
– presumes a solution of the most profound problems of contemporary
physics. Meanwhile the term “particle” is used loosely in different con-
texts, and we shall follow this custom calling by particle an elementary
quantum object in the above-de/g192ned sense.
Equations for free quantum particles are in fact a suitable way for de-
scription of irreducible representations of the corresponding symmetry
group. In particular, Galilean relativity implies full kinematical and dy-
namical description of a nonrelativistic quantum particle, including the
basic Schr ¨odinger equation. In this chapter we shall try to explain this
point by elementary means, paying the main attention to the question –
how symmetry properties allow one to relate physical parameters such as
coordinate, velocity, time, angle etc. to certain quantum measurements,
i.e., resolutions of identity in the Hilbert space of the representation.
3.2. One-parametershiftgroupsanduncertaintyrelations
Assume that the apparatus preparing a quantum state is shifted along the
axis ξ by the distance x, which is described by the Galilei transformation
ξ
′= ξ− x (see the left side of Figure 3.2). If S was the basic state, the
new state will be Sx = Vx SV∗
x where x → Vx , x ∈ R, is a projective
unitary representation of the additive group of the real line R.
Similarly, consider the transformations of the reference frame where
the position of the apparatus is not changed but the time count is shifted
according to the relation τ
′= τ+ t. This means simply that the prepara-
tion procedure is the same but begins t units of time earlier as compared
to the initial one. Then the new prepared stateSt will be related to the ba-
sic one by the formula St = Vt SV∗
t , where t → Vt , is again a projective
unitary representation2 of R.
2 Thus St is similar to S−x rather than to Sx . With this choice St gives the temporal evolution of the
state S.


90 Alexander Holevo
These are the two most important examples when representations ofR
arise. We shall consider them here from a general point of view, postpon-
ing the applications to spatial and temporal shifts to the corresponding
sections. However the results of this section are best visualized by hav-
ing in mind the case of spatial shifts. Let us recall that by representation
we always mean a continuous representation.
Proposition3.2.1. Any projective unitary representation θ → ˜V
θ , θ ∈
R, of the additive group of R reduces to a unitary one; i.e., there exists a
unitary representation θ→ Vθ , θ∈ R, such that Vθ = αθ ˜Vθ ,|αθ|≡1.
The family{Vθ} satis/g192es
Vθ1 Vθ2 = Vθ1+θ2; θ1,θ 2 ∈ R
and therefore constitutes an one-parameter group of unitary operators.
By Stone’s theorem of Section 2.4,
V
θ = exp(iθ A), θ ∈ R,
where A is a self-adjoint operator in H. Therefore the action of the one-
parameter automorphism group on quantum states is described by
S→ Sθ = eiθ A Se−iθ A. (3.2.7)
In what follows we shall restrict for simplicity to pure states. If S =
|ψ)(ψ| with ψ ∈ D (A), then Sθ =| ψθ )(ψθ| with ψθ = exp(iθ A)ψ ∈
D (A).
We shall supply with the subscriptθ the quantities referring to the state
Sθ , so that Eθ (X)= (ψθ|Xψθ ) is the mean value of an observableX with
respect to the state Sθ . Proceeding formally, we get
d
dθ Eθ (x)=
⎫dψθ
dθ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐Xψ
θ
⎬
+
⎫
ψθ|X dψθ
dθ
⎬
.
This is easily veri/g192ed ifX is bounded. Then by the equation (2.4.49)
d
dθ Eθ (X)= 2I m(Aψθ|Xψθ). (3.2.8)
Using the uncertainty relation (2.6.63) we get an important Mandelstam-
Tamm inequality
D
θ (X)· Dθ (A)≥ 1
4
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dθ Eθ (X)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
. (3.2.9)

91 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
We shall obtain a rigorous version of this inequality for arbitrary states
and measurements with /g192nite second moments in Section 6.3.
The importance of this result lies in the fact that it gives a principal
lower bound for accuracy of quantum measurements, which substantially
generalizes the uncertainty relation. To explain this point we must for-
mulate the quantum estimation problem. Assume that an apparatus pre-
pares the basic state S which is completely known. Then the appara-
tus is transformed according to a change of the shift parameter θ. The
new prepared state will be the state S
θ of (3.2.7). The actual value θ is
supposed to be unknown and the problem is to estimate this value sta-
tistically by making a measurement over the object. The measurement
must be R-valued and for simplicity we restrict here to observables. Any
observable X presents a statistical estimate of parameter θ. The qual-
ity of the estimate X can be measured by the mean-square deviation
E
θ((X − θ)2) = Dθ (X)+ (Eθ (X)− θ)2. Then the inequality (3.2.9)
sets the lower bound
Eθ ((X− θ)2)≥ b(θ)2+[1+ b′(θ)]2
4Dθ (A) , (3.2.10)
where b(θ)= Eθ (X)− θ is the bias of the estimate X.
This way of reasoning is characteristic for statistical thinking and is
new only in the context of quantum theory. From this point of view,
to any physical parameter corresponds a variety of measurements which
differ at least by their accuracy. However the class of all estimates is too
general – the inequality (3.2.10) holds for observables X which in fact
may have nothing to do with the parameter θ. One has to require some
properties for observables X to relate them with the parameterθ. Follow-
ing statistical terminology we call an estimate X unbiased if b(θ) = 0
or
E
θ (X)= θ, θ ∈ R. (3.2.11)
Unbiasedness means that there is no systematic error in the measurement
results. For unbiased estimates the inequality (3.2.10) takes the form
D
θ (X)≥[ 4Dθ (A)]−1. (3.2.12)
Note that Dθ (A)≡ DS(A) since A commutes with the unitary group
{exp(iθ A)}. Thus for any unbiased estimate of the shift parameter θ the
variance is bounded from below by the quantity inversely proportional to
the uncertainty of the observable A in the basic state S. Later we shall
apply (3.2.12) to estimation of spatial and temporal shifts and now we are
going to discuss the connection of (3.2.12) with traditional forms of the
uncertainty relation.

92 Alexander Holevo
An observable represented by the self-adjoint operator B is called
canonically conjugate to A if the corresponding unitary groups satisfy
the Weyl canonical commutation relation(CCR)
eiχ B eiθ A = eiθχ eiθ Aeiχ B; θ,χ ∈ R. (3.2.13)
Obviously this is equivalent for A to be canonically conjugate to −B.
Differentiating with respect to θ and χ the identity
(e−iχ Bψ|eiθ Aψ)= eiθχ (e−iθ Aψ|eiχ Bψ),
which follows form (3.2.13), we get with the help of (2.4.49)
2I m(Aψ|Bψ)= (ψ|ψ); ψ∈ D (A)∩ D (B). (3.2.14)
If A and B were bounded this would imply the Heisenberg CCR
[A, B]=i I. (3.2.15)
However as we shall see both canonically conjugate observables are nec-
essarily unbounded. Therefore (3.2.15) involves domain troubles, and
one can expect (3.2.15) to hold only on a dense domain. Moreover
(3.2.13) and (3.2.15) are not strictly equivalent since there are pairs of
operators satisfying (3.2.15) on a dense domain which do not satisfy
(3.2.13). The Weyl CCR refers to physically more primary objects which
are unitary groups describing transformations of states.
Substituting (3.2.14) into (2.6.63) we get the Heisenberg uncertainty
relation
D
S(A)· DS(B)≥ 1
4. (3.2.16)
Let us show that this follows also from (3.2.12). Then (3.2.12) can be
regarded as a generalization of the Heisenberg uncertainty relation to sit-
uations where the canonically conjugate observable B may not exist.
We shall deduce (3.2.16) from (3.2.12) by showing that the canonically
conjugate observable B (provided it exists) is, up to a constant, unbiased
estimate of the shift parameter θ. Rewriting (3.2.13) in the form
e
−iθ Aeiχ B eiθ A = eiχ( B+θ), (3.2.17)
and denoting G(dλ) the spectral measure of B we get by (2.4.46)
∫
eiχλ (eiθ Aψ|G(dλ)eiθ Aψ)=
∫
eiχ(λ+θ)(ψ|G(dλ)ψ)

93 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
for all λ ∈ R and all unit vectors ψ ∈ H. Both sides of this equality
are the Fourier transforms of probability distributions. By the uniqueness
property of the Fourier transform this is equivalent to
(e
iθ Aψ|G(/Lambda1)eiθ Aψ)= (ψ|G(/Lambda1−θ )ψ), (3.2.18)
for all Borel sets /Lambda1⊂ R, where /Delta1−θ ={ λ− θ : λ∈ /Lambda1}is the shift of
the set /Lambda1by−θ. Since it holds for all ψ∈ H, then
e−iθ AG(/Lambda1)eiθ A = G(/Lambda1−θ ); θ∈ R,/Lambda1∈ A (R). (3.2.19)
A resolution of identity satisfying this relation is calledcovariant with
respect to the representation θ → exp(iθ A) of R. Appropriately gen-
eralized, the covariance property will appear to be very important in the
statistical analysis of quantum systems. Denoting by μ
G
θ
(dλ) the proba-
bility distribution of the measurement G={ G(dλ)} with respect to the
state Sθ =| ψθ )(ψθ| we get from (3.2.18)
μG
θ
(/Lambda1)= μG
0
(/Lambda1−θ ); θ∈ R,/Lambda1∈ A (R). (3.2.20)
This means that the transformation of the preparing apparatus by the shift
θ is re/g193ected by the corresponding shift in the measurement probability
distribution. This is an appealing reason to associate a resolution of iden-
tity satisfying (3.2.19) with a measurement of the shift parameter θ.
The covariance property implies
E
θ (B)=
∫∞
−∞
λμG
θ (dλ)=
∫∞
−∞
(λ+ θ)μG
0 (dλ)= E0(B)+ θ,
so that B is up to a constant an unbiased estimate of θ. Moreover the
variance Dθ (B) does not depend on θ and is equal to D0(B)≡ DS(B).
Substituting X = B− E0(B), which is strictly unbiased, into (3.2.12)
yields (3.2.16) as it was asserted.
3.3. Kinematicsofaquantumparticleinonedimension
In the case of one-dimensional motion a frame of reference is described
by the pair of variables (ξ, τ) where ξ is the spatial coordinate and τ is
the temporal coordinate. Consider the Galilei transformation
ξ
′= ξ− x− vτ, τ ′= τ. (3.3.21)
It corresponds to the change in the position of the preparing apparatus
when it is shifted along the basic axis ξ by the distance x and is mov-
ing with the velocity v relative to its initial position (see the left side of

94 Alexander Holevo
Figure 3.3). Any such transformation is described by the pair of real
parameters g= (x,v) with the law of composition given by
(x
1,v 1)(x2,v 2)= (x1+ x2,v 1+ v2).
Therefore the group of kinematical transformations in one dimension is
the additive group of the plane R
2.
According to the general scheme presented in Section 3.1 we shall look
for projective unitary representations(x,v) → Wx,v of R2. First we show
that choosing an appropriately multiplier of Xx,v we can always reduce
(3.1.6) to
Wx1,v1 Wx2,v2 = exp
[
−iμ
2 (x1v2− x2v1)
]
Wx1+x2,v1+v2. (3.3.22)
This is sometimes called the Weyl-Segal CCR.
Put Vx = Wx,0, Uv = W0,v. The automorphisms
S→ Vx SV∗
x , S→ Uv, SU∗
v
describe changes of states correspondingly under the spatial and the ve-
locity shifts. By Proposition 3.2.1 we can assume that{V
x} and{Uv} form
one-parameter groups of unitary operators:
Vx1 Vx2 = Vx1+x2 , Uv1 Vv2 = Uv1+v2.
Consider the transformation which consists of the spatial shift by the
distance x and change of the velocity from 0 to v. This can be accom-
plished in the two different ways
(x,v) = (x, 0)(0,v) = (0,v) (x, 0),


95 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
but the resulting state should not depend on the choice so that
S→ Uv Vx SV∗
x U∗
v = Vx Uv SU∗
v V∗
x
for any S. It follows that
Uv Vx = eiη(x,v) Vx Uv, (3.3.23)
where η(·,·) is a real continuous function. For x = 0o rv = 0 (3.3.23)
implies 1≡ exp iη(0,v)≡ exp iη(x,0) so we can put η(x,0)≡ η(v,0)≡
0, since V0 = U0 = I . Multiplying (3.3.23) by Uv′we get
η(x,v + v′)= η(x,v) + η(x,v′)(mod 2π).
The only continuous solution of this equation satisfying η(x, 0) = 0
is η(x,v) = η(x)· v. In the same way η(x + x′,v) = η(x,v) +
η(x′,v) (mod 2π) whence η(x,v) = μxv with a real constant μ.W e
thus get
Uv Vx = eiμxv VxUv. (3.3.24)
Since Wx,v is Vx Uv, up to an arbitrary factor of unit modulus, we can
choose
Wx,v = eiμxv/2Vx Uv. (3.3.25)
Then{Wx,v} is easily seen to satisfy (3.3.22). The operators Wx,v are
sometimes called displacement operators.
Assume now that the representation (x,v) → Wx,v is irreducible.
Then if μ = 0, (3.3.24) implies [Vx, Uv]≡0, and one easily shows
that the only possibility is the “trivial” one-dimensional representation
(x,v) → exp i(αx+βv) with α, β∈ R. Thus, the following proposition
holds.
Proposition3.3.1. Any projective unitary representation of the group of
kinematical transformations (3.3.21) can be described by a family of uni-
tary operators {W
x,v} satisfying (3.3.22). If the representation is irre-
ducible and dim H > 1, then μ̸=0.
As we shall see later, the parameter μ corresponds to the mass of the
object so that only the case μ>0 is physically relevant.
By Stone’s theorem, in the Hilbert space of the representationH there
are self-adjoint operators P and Q such that
Vx = e−ixP , x∈ R, (3.3.26)
Uv = eiμvQ,v ∈ R. (3.3.27)

96 Alexander Holevo
The relation (3.3.24) (which is equivalent to (3.3.22)) is just the Weyl
CCR (3.2.13) for A=− P, B= Q saying the Q and P are canonically
conjugate observables.
The spectral measures of Q and P determined from the spectral repre-
sentations
Q=
∫
ξ E(dξ), μ
−1 P=
∫
ηF(dη),
describe quantum measurements satisfying the covariance condition
V∗
x E(B)Vx = E(B−x), B∈ A (R),
U∗
v F(B)Uv = F(B−v), B∈ A (R), (3.3.28)
which follow from (3.2.19). We shall use the /g192rst of these relations to
explain the kinematical meaning of the observable Q.
Consider the family of the states
S
x = e−ixP SeixP , x∈ R,
corresponding to different values of the coordinate parameter x . This
parameter describes the position of the preparing apparatus and in this
sense it re/g193ects an information on the position of the microobject. If the
measurement of the observable Q is performed, then by (3.2.20) applied
to A=− P, B= Q, the resulting probability distributions satisfy
μ
E
x (B)= μE
0 (B−x); x∈ R, B∈ A (R).
This means that the spatial shift of the preparing apparatus is re/g193ected
by the corresponding shift of the resulting probability distribution (Fig-
ure 3.2). Therefore the observable Q and its spectral measure E =
{E(dξ)} are naturally associated with a measurement of coordinate pa-
rameter x.
The property which makes this association possible is the covariance
property (3.3.28) with respect to the representation of the spatial shifts
group. As we shall see in Chapter 4 there is a variety of covariant mea-
surements: a parameter x can be measured in different ways with differ-
ent accuracy. According to (3.2.12) the accuracy of measurement of the
coordinate parameter x is bounded from below:
D
x(X)≥[ 4Dx(P)]−1
for any unbiased estimate X of x. We shall show that there is a way to
single out the observable Q as an optimal estimate of x. We shall call

97 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Q the canonical coordinate observable, as is usually done in physical
literature.
In the same way the observable μ−1 P can be associated with measur-
ing the relative velocity parameter v in the family of states
Sv = eiμvQ Se−iμvQ,v ∈ R.
Therefore we shall call μ−1 P the canonical velocity observable3.
Since Q and P are canonically conjugate, they satisfy (3.2.14):
2I m(Qψ|Pψ)= (ψ|ψ), ψ ∈ D (Q)∩ D (P),
and the Heisenberg uncertainty relation
DS(Q)· DS(P)≥ 1
4. (3.3.29)
In physics it is more convenient to use, instead of the velocity observ-
able, the momentum observable which is de/g192ned as
p= m· (velocity observable)= ℏP,
where m is the “classical mass”, ℏ= m/μ is the quantity proportional to
Planck’s constant. The meaning of these coef/g192cients will be explained in
Section 3.7. Redenoting q≡ Q we write (3.3.29) in the form
D
S(q)· DS(p)≥ ℏ2
4 , (3.3.30)
which is usually formally derived from the Heisenberg CCR
[q, p]=iℏ. (3.3.31)
3.4. Uniquenesstheorem.TheSchr ¨odinger
andthemomentumrepresentations
The CCR (3.3.22) is of fundamental importance in quantum theory. A
concrete family of unitary operators{W
x,v} in a Hilbert space H satisfy-
ing (3.3.22) is called a representation of the CCR. According to our con-
vention we always mean continuous representations such that(ϕ|Wx,vψ)
are continuous functions of (x,v) . A complete description of such rep-
resentations is given by the famous uniqueness theorem due to von Neu-
mann and Stone. The proof of the theorem is postponed until Section 5.3.
3 For the charged particle the velocity observable has a different form, but we shall not touch this
question (see, e.g., Jauch [71]).

98 Alexander Holevo
Theorem3.4.1(Uniqueness). Any two irreducible representations
(x,v) → W( j)
x,v; j= 1, 2,
of the CCR are unitarily equivalent: there is a linear isometric map U of
H2 onto H1, where H j is the space of jth representation, such that
W(2)
x,v = U∗W(1)
x,vU; (x,v) ∈ R2.
Moreover any representation of the CCR is a discrete orthogonal sum of
irreducible representations.
This implies that any representation of the CCR is unitarily equivalent
to the representation of the form
(x,v) →
⎡
⎢
⎣
W
(0)
x,v 0
...
0 W(0)
x,v
⎤
⎥
⎦ ,
where (x,v) → W
(0)
x,v is a /g192xed irreducible representation. Thus the CCR
gives an essentially unique description of the kinematics of quantum ob-
ject with the given value of μ. To describe all representations it is suf/g192-
cient to give only one irreducible representation.
Consider the space
H = L 2(R) of the complex square-integrable
functions on the real line R and the family of unitary operators in H
acting on ψ∈ H by the relation
Wx,vψ(ξ) = exp
[
iμv
⎫
ξ− x
2
⎬]
ψ(ξ − x). (3.4.32)
One easily checks that (x,v) → Wx,v is a representation of the CCR. It
is an irreducible representation. To explain it consider the one-parameter
unitary groups V
x = Wx,0 and Uv = W0,v acting on ψ by the formulas
Vxψ(ξ) = ψ(ξ − x), (3.4.33)
Uvψ(ξ) = eiμvξ ψ(ξ). (3.4.34)
Assume that L ⊂ H is an invariant closed subspace of{Wx,v; (x,v) ∈
R2}. Then it is invariant under (3.4.34). It follows that there is a measur-
able subset B ⊂ R such that L ={ ψ : ψ(ξ) = 0, ξ ∈ B}. But such a
subspace can be invariant under all shifts (3.4.33) only if either B or the
complement of B has zero Lebesgue measure. This corresponds to either
L = H or L =[ 0] so that the representation is irreducible.

99 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The representation (3.4.32) of the CCR in L 2(R) is called the Schr¨o-
dinger representation. From (3.4.34) and (3.3.27) we get the canonical
observables in this representation
Qψ(ξ) = ξψ(ξ), ψ ∈ D (Q), (3.4.35)
and from (3.4.33) and (3.3.26)
Pψ(ξ) = i−1 d
dξ ψ(ξ), ψ ∈ D (P). (3.4.36)
Apparently D (Q)∩ D (P) contains the dense subspace S (R) of the
in/g192nitely differentiable functions which tend to zero together with all
derivatives faster than any degree ofξ as|ξ|→∞ .
Fix x and v and consider the family of unitary operators {W
θ x,θv; θ ∈
R}. From (3.3.22) it follows that this is a one-parameter unitary group.
From (3.4.32)
d
dθ Wθ x,θv ψ(ξ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
θ=0
= μvξψ(ξ) − xi−1 d
dξ ψ(ξ)
= (μvQ− xP )ψ(ξ)
for ψ, say, from S (R). It follows that
Wx,v = exp[i(μvQ− xP )], (3.4.37)
where μvQ− xP means the self-adjoint extension of the sum de/g192ned,
e.g.,o n S (R).
Since by (3.4.35) Q is just the operator of multiplication by ξ in
L 2(R), then by Section 2.4 Q is “diagonal” in the Schr ¨odinger repre-
sentation, i.e., in Dirac’s notations
Q=
∫
ξ|ξ)(ξ|dξ,
where|ξ) can be regarded as “vector” of an “unphysical state” in which
the object has a precisely determined coordinate ξ. The probability dis-
tribution of the coordinate observable Q = q with respect to a state
S=| ψ)(ψ| is, according to (2.3.36),|ψ(ξ)|2dξ. The more this distribu-
tion is concentrated at the point¯q, i.e., the smaller is DS(q), the more the
quantum object resembles a classical point mass (a particle).
On the other hand, the momentum operator p= ℏP = ℏi−1d/dξ has
the formal eigenfunctions exp(iξη) ; η∈ R (see Section 2.4), correspond-
ing to “unphysical states” in which the object has strictly determined ve-
locity η/μ and momentum ℏη. From the Heisenberg uncertainty rela-
tion (3.3.30) it follows that the more de/g192nite is the momentum,i.e., the

100 Alexander Holevo
smaller DS(p), the less de/g192nite is the spatial localisation of the object.
In the states with DS(p)≈ 0 the object thus resembles a classical wave.
Therefore, depending on preparation of the basic state, a quantum object
may display features both of a classical wave and a classical particle.
Consider the Fourier transform
˜ψ(η)= 1
√
2πℏ
∫
e−iξη/ℏψ(ξ) dξ, (3.4.38)
modi/g192ed by the factorℏ−1, which maps isometrically H = L 2(R) onto
˜H = L 2(R). De/g192ning the operators˜Wx,v in ˜H by ˜Wxv ˜ψ = ˜Wx,vψ
one calculates using (3.3.22) and (3.4.38)
˜Wx,v ˜ψ(η)= exp
[
−ix
ℏ
⎫
η− mv
2
⎬]
˜ψ(η− mv). (3.4.39)
The family (x,v) → ˜Wx,v forms a different representation of the CCR in
the space ˜H which is called the momentum representation. The formula
(3.4.38) describes the transform from the Schr ¨odinger representation to
the momentum representation and gives explicitly their unitary equiva-
lence. In momentum representation
˜p˜ψ(η)≡ ˜pψ(η)= η˜ψ(η), ˜q˜ψ(η)= ℏi d
dη
˜ψ(η),
so it “diagonalizes” the momentum observable.
3.5. Minimum-uncertaintystates.Thecompletenessrelation
Pure states Sψ for which the equality holds in the uncertainty relation
(3.3.29) are called minimum-uncertainty states . According to (2.6.64)
this is the case if and only if for a real c
[(Q− Q)+ ic(P− P)]ψ= 0. (3.5.40)
For each c > 0 this equation has a solution ψ ∈ L 2(R) which is unique
up to a coef/g192cient. Indeed in the Schr¨odinger representation (3.5.40)
reads [
(ξ− Q)+ c
⎫ d
dξ − iP
⎬]
(ξ|ψ)= 0, (3.5.41)
whence, using the normalization
∫
|(ξ|ψ)|2dξ= 1,
(ξ|ψ)= k
4√πc exp
[
iPξ− (ξ− Q)2
2c
]
,

101 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
with|k|=1, c > 0. Choosing k= exp(−iQ P/2), putting c= 2σ 2 and
denoting the resulting unit vector by|P, Q; σ 2),w eh a v e
(ξ|P, Q; σ 2)= 1
4√
2πσ 2
exp
[
iP
⎫
ξ− Q
2
⎬
− (ξ− Q)2
2σ 2
]
. (3.5.42)
The meaning of P, Q and σ 2 is clear: P and Q are the mean values of P
and Q in the state Sψ and
σ 2 = DS(Q)=[ 4DS(P)]−1.
The minimum-uncertainty states are sometimes called “wave packets”;
under a special reparametrization they will appear also as “coherent states”
in Section 3.10. Of special importance is the ground state with
P= Q=
0 corresponding to the vector
(ξ|0, 0; σ 2)= 1
4√
2πσ 2
exp
⎫
− ξ2
4σ 2
⎬
. (3.5.43)
The vector|P, Q; σ 2) is obtained from it through the action of the dis-
placement operator
|P, Q; σ 2)= WQ,P/μ|0, 0; σ 2), (3.5.44)
as follows from (3.4.32) and (3.5.42).
We shall show that for any /g192xedσ 2 the family of vectors{|P, Q; σ 2);
(P, Q)∈ R2} satis/g192es thecompleteness relation
∫∫
|P, Q; σ 2)(σ 2; Q, P|dP dQ
2π = I. (3.5.45)
In contrast to the formal completeness relations (2.3.33) and (2.4.52) this
relation has strict mathematical meaning, the integral being understood
in the sense of weak convergence, since |
P, Q; σ 2) are usual vectors of
the Hilbert space. However these vectors are not orthogonal for different
values of
P, Q; moreover they are linearly dependent. This is expressed
by saying that they form an overcomplete system.
The completeness relation (3.5.45) follows from the so called orthog-
onality relation for an irreducible representation of the CCR. Such rela-
tions have a very general nature (cf. Section 4.8), but we give an elemen-
tary proof of them for the particular case of interest.

102 Alexander Holevo
Proposition3.5.1. Let (x,v) → Wx,v be an irreducible representation
of the CCR in H. Then the matrix elements (ψ|Wx,vϕ) are Lebesgue
square-integrable functions of (x,v) .I f {ej} is an orthonormal basis in
H then the functions
{
√
μ/2π(ej|Wx,vek)}
form an orthonormal basis in the space L 2(R2) of complex square inte-
grable functions of (x,v) so that the orthogonality relations hold:
μ
2π
∫∫
(ej|Wx,vek)(el|Wx,vem)dx dv= δjl δkm . (3.5.46)
Proof. By Theorem 3.4.1 we can deal with the Schr ¨odinger representa-
tion. By (3.4.32)
1√
2π
(ϕ|Wx,vψ)= 1√
2π
e−ixy/2
∫
ϕ(ξ) eiyξ ψ(ξ − x)dξ
= 1
2π e−ixy/2
∫∫
ϕ(ξ) ˜ψ(η)eiηξ e−i(ηx−yξ) dξ dη,
(3.5.47)
for all ϕ, ψ ∈ H, where ˜ψ(η) is now the Fourier transform of ψ(ξ) and
y= μv. Since ϕ, ˜ψ are square-integrable, then ϕ(ξ) ˜ψ(η) exp(iηξ) is a
square-integrable function of(ξ, η). Therefore the integral in (3.5.47) has
the meaning as Fourier transform F of a square-integrable function and
so the function(ϕ|Wx,vψ) is a square-integrable function of(x,v) .I f{ej}
is an orthonormal basis in L 2(R), then the functions ej(ξ)˜ek(η) exp(iηξ)
form an orthonormal basis in L 2(R2). Since the Fourier transform F
is isometric, then the functions F[ej(ξ)˜ek(η) exp(iηξ)] also form an or-
thonormal basis in L 2(R2). Therefore the functions
(2π)−1/2(ej|Wx,y/μek)= exp(ixy/2)· F[ej(ξ)˜ek(η) exp(iηξ)]
form an orthonormal basis in the space L 2(R2) of the variables x, y =
μv, whence (3.5.46) follows.
From (3.5.46) we get
μ
2π
∫∫
(ϕ1|Wx,vψ1)(ϕ2|Wx,vψ2)dx dv= (ϕ1|ϕ2)(ψ1|ψ2) (3.5.48)
for arbitrary ϕj , ψj ∈ H ; j = 1, 2. Putting ψ1 = ψ2 = ψ with
(ψ|ψ)= 1, we obtain
μ
2π
∫∫
(ϕ2|Wx,vψ)(ψ|Wx,vϕ1)dx dv= (ϕ2|ϕ2).

103 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Since ϕ1, ϕ2 are arbitrary, this means that
μ
2π
∫∫
Wx,v|ψ)(ψ|W∗
x,vdx dv= I, (3.5.49)
where the integral converges weakly. Thus for any unit vectorψ the fam-
ily{Wx,v|ψ); (x,v) ∈ R2} satis/g192es the completeness relation (3.5.49).
Putting|ψ)=| 0, 0; σ 2) we get (3.5.45).
3.6. Jointmeasurementsofcoordinateandvelocity
As follows from the uncertainty relation (3.3.29) the observables of co-
ordinate Q and velocity μ
−1 P are incompatible. This means that there is
no measurement M(dx dv) such that the measurements E(dx) and F(dv)
described by the spectral measures of Q and μ−1 P are marginal with re-
spect to M(dx dv), i.e.,
E(dx)=
∫
M(dx, dv), F(dv)=
∫
M(dx dv).
However if one concludes that quantum theory unconditionally forbids
joint measurements of coordinate and velocity, one meets serious dif/g192-
culties. Experimentally velocity is often measured through the propor-
tional quantity, the momentum P. A physicist considering classical me-
chanics as the limit of quantum theory as ℏ→ 0, encounters a troubling
discontinuity at ℏ= 0; for all ℏ̸=0, however small, there is no joint
measurement for q, p, and for ℏ= 0 they are trivially jointly measur-
able. More sharply, if one properly considers classical mechanics only
as approximation of the more basic quantum theory, one has to conclude
the impossibility of joint measurements of coordinate and momentum for
macroscopic objects as well. Indeed, consider a simpli/g192ed “macroscopic
object” consisting of an arbitrary large number N of identical quantum
particles, the canonical observables q
j , pj of which satisfy the Heisen-
berg CCR for N degrees of freedom
[qj, pk]=iℏδ jk , [qj, qk]=[ pj , pk]=0. (3.6.50)
Then the “macroscopic observable” – coordinate of the center of mass
q = N−1 ∑qj and the total momentum p = ∑ pj – satisfy the same
Heisenberg CCR (3.3.31) as the “microscopic observables”qj , pj . Since
ℏ= 0 (though it is extremely small if expressed in the classical units,
ℏ≈ 10−27 gc m2 s−1) one has to acknowledge the impossibility of joint
measurements of the “macroscopic observables” q and p.

104 Alexander Holevo
This is in apparent contradiction with the experimental evidence of
classical mechanics. Moreover, there are experiments with quantum par-
ticles giving the data which can be interpreted as the joint measurements
of coordinate and velocity. For example, from the trace of a charged
particle in a bubble chamber it is possible to estimate both coordinate
and momentum of the particle. In fact, even if only the momentum is
measured, there is information about the localization of the particle: the
experimenter knows at least that the particle is within the measuring ap-
paratus. Adjoining this information to the results of the measurement one
can interpret them as “joint measurement” of coordinate and momentum.
Anyhow, joint measurements of coordinate and velocity actually do exist,
so the problem is to /g192nd for them a proper quantum theoretical descrip-
tion.
This problem can be given a natural solution in the framework of the
concept of measurement developed in Chapters 1-2. According to it, a
joint measurement of a pair of parametersx and v must be described by a
resolution of identity M(dx dv) in
H, with the joint probability distribu-
tion of the results given byμS(dx dv)= Tr SM (dx dv). To single out the
resolutions of identity which actually correspond to joint measurements
of the coordinate and the velocity, we shall make use of the covariance
argument similar to one used in Section 3.3 for the explanation of the
kinematical meaning of the observables Q and P.
Assume that a state S is prepared by an apparatus to which a frame
of reference is related. If the apparatus is shifted to the distance x and
moves with the velocity v relative to its basic position, then the prepared
state will be
S
x,v = Wx,v SV∗
x,v.
The parameters x and v are thus the physical quantities which contain
an information about the state of the microobject insofar as it is prepared
by the apparatus the position of which is characterized by x and v. Let
M(dx dv) be a resolution of identity describing a joint measurement of
x and v; it is then natural to require that the probability distribution of
the measurement with respect to the “shifted” state S
x,v be just the initial
probability distribution shifted by the same vector (x,v) , i.e.,
μSx,v (B)= μS(B−x,−v); B∈ A (R2),
where B−x,−v ={ (ξ− x,η − v): (ξ, η)∈ B} (Figure 3.3).
This equality should hold for all S, whence
W∗
x,v M(B)Wx,v = M(B−x,−v); B∈ A (R2). (3.6.51)
The measurements M(dx dv) satisfying this condition will be called co-
variant with respect to the representation (x,v) → Wx,v of the group of

105 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
kinematical transformations. The condition (3.6.51) is analogous to the
condition (3.2.19) for an one-parameter shift group.
In Chapter 4 we shall describe all resolutions of identity satisfying the
condition (3.6.51); among them there are no orthogonal ones. This is
another expression of the fact that there are no joint measurements of co-
ordinate and velocity in the conventional sense. The generating example
of the covariant measurement is given by
M(dx dv)= W
x,v|ψ)(ψ|W∗
x,v
μ dx dv
2π , (3.6.52)
where ψ is a unit vector of H. This means that for a Borel B we de/g192ne
(ϕ|M(B)ϕ)=
∫∫
B
(ϕ|Wx,vψ)(ψ|Wx,vϕ)μ dx dv
2π ,ϕ ∈ H,
the integral converging by Proposition 3.5.1. All properties of the res-
olution of identity are satis/g192ed: thatM(B) ≥ 0 is obvious; the weak
σ -additivity follows from the property of the integral, and the normaliza-
tion M(R
2)= I is equivalent to the completeness relation (3.5.49). That
(3.6.52) satis/g192es (3.6.51) follows from the CCR (3.3.22). The probability
distribution of the measurement with respect to the state S is
μ
S(dx dv)= (ψ|W∗
x,v SVx,vψ) μ dx dv
2π . (3.6.53)
To visualize this construction we give an idealized description of a
procedure which can be considered as realization of the measurement
(3.6.52) in the sense of Section 2.5. In addition to
H with the canonical
pair Q, P in H consider the identical space H0 and a canonical pair Q0,
P0 in H0. In the tensor product H⊗ H0 consider the operators
˜P= P⊗ I0 + I⊗ P0, ˜Q= Q⊗ I0− I⊗ Q0, (3.6.54)
where I0 is the unit operator in H0. These operators are in/g192nitesimal
generators of the unitary groups
eiξ˜Q = eiξ Q ⊗ e−iξ Q0 , eiηP ⊗ eiηP0 , (3.6.55)
which commute by the Weyl CCR (3.3.24), and therefore˜P, ˜Q are com-
muting self-adjoint operators in the sense of Section 2.6. It follows that
˜Q and μ−1˜P are compatible and admit the joint measurement E(dx dv).
For de/g192niteness we may take the Schr¨odinger representation Q = ξ1,
P = i−1d/dξ1 in H = L 2(R1), and Q0 = ξ2, P0 = i−1d/dξ2 in H0 =

106 Alexander Holevo
L 2(R2). Consider a “particle” with two degrees of freedom moving in
the plane ξ1, ξ2. Then the Hilbert space of the particle will be H⊗ H0 =
L 2(R2). Introducing the new coordinate systemξ′
1, ξ′
2 rotated through the
angle−π/4 relative to the initial one (Figure 3.4), we /g192nd the canonical
observables corresponding to the new coordinate axes
P′
ξ′
2
= i−1 ∂
∂ξ′
2
= (i
√
2)−1
⎫ ∂
∂ξ1
+ ∂
∂ξ2
⎬
=
√
2
−1
(Pξ1 + Pξ2 ),
Qξ′
1 = ξ′
1 =
√
2
−1
(ξ1− ξ2)=
√
2
−1
(Qξ1 − Qξ2 ),
so that ˜P =
√
2Pξ′
2 , ˜Q =
√
2Qξ′
1 . The observables Pξ′
2 and Qξ′
1 corre-
spond to the mutually orthogonal axes and apparently are jointly measur-
able.
ξ2
ξ2
ξ1
ξ1'
'
π
4
Figure3.4.
Let the auxiliary degree of freedom ξ2 be described by the state S0 =
|¯ψ)(¯ψ|, where the vector ¯ψ is given in the Schr¨odinger representation by
the function ψ(ξ2) = (ξ2|¯ψ), which is complex conjugate to ψ(ξ) =
(ξ|ψ).H e r e ψ is the vector de/g192ning the covariant measurement by
(3.6.52).
Proposition3.6.1. The triple (
H0,S 0, E), where E is the joint measure-
ment of ˜Q and μ−1˜P, de/g192ned by(3.6.54) is a realization of the measure-
ment M given by (3.6.52) in the sense that
μE
S⊗S0 (dx dv)= μM
S (dx dv)
for all states S in H.
We postpone the proof of this statement until Section 5.3 where the
necessary mathematical tools are developed.

107 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Now the quantitative answer to the question – what is the best accuracy
for a joint measurement of the coordinate x and the velocity v admitted
by quantum theory – can be given. We shall restrict to covariant mea-
surements (3.6.52) having /g192nite second moments and zero mean values
with respect to the state S. Then as at the end of Section 3.2 we can show
that the measurements are unbiased
E
x{M}≡
∫∫
ˆxμM
Sx,v (dˆx dˆv)= x0+ x,
Ev{M}≡
∫∫
ˆvμM
Sx,v (dˆx dˆv)= v0+ v.
Moreover, the marginal variances
Dx{M}≡
∫∫
(ˆx− Ex{M})2μSx,v (dˆx dˆv),
Dv{M}≡
∫∫
(ˆv− Ev{M})2μSx,v (dˆx dˆv)
are all the same for all values ofx, v and so they are equal to the marginal
variances with respect to the basic state S.
As the measure of accuracy of joint measurement we take
R{M}= gx Dx{M}+ gv Dv{M}, (3.6.56)
where gx , gv are positive constants, de/g192ning the relative scaling of the
variances. By Proposition 3.6.1
Dx{M}= DS(Q)+ DS0 (Q0), Dv{M}=μ −2[DS(P)+ DS0 (P0)].
By the inequality a+ b≥ 2
√
ab and the uncertainty relation (3.3.29)
gx DS0 (Q0)+ gvμ−2 DS0 ≥ 2
√
gx gvμ−2 DS0 (Q0)DS0 (P0)
≥ μ−1√gx gv
with the equality achieved if and only if
DS0 (Q0)= 1
2μ
√gv
gx
, DS0 (P0)= μ
2
√gx
gv, (3.6.57)
i.e., if and only if S0 is the minimum-uncertainty state|0, 0; σ 2)(σ2; 0, 0|
with σ2 equal to DS0 (Q0) from (3.6.57).
It follows that
min
M
R{M}= gx DS(Q)+ gv DS(μ−1 P)+ μ−1√gx gv, (3.6.58)

108 Alexander Holevo
with the minimum achieved for the unique optimal covariant measure-
ment
M
∗(dx dv)=| μv, x; σ2)(σ 2; x,μ v|μ dx dv
2π , (3.6.59)
with σ 2 = (2μ)−1√gx/gv. We call it the canonical measurement. Here
we have used (3.6.52) and (3.5.44). In Section 4.8 we shall extend (3.6.58)
to all covariant measurements of(x,v) with /g192nite second moments. This
result shows clearly the place of the minimum-uncertainty states in the
problem of joint measurements of coordinate and velocity.
Putting μ= m/ℏ, p = ℏP, consider the classical limit with ℏ→ 0,
m = const., D
S(p) = const.. The optimal measurement is furnished
by measuring the observables q⊗ I0 − I⊗ q0, m−1(p⊗ I0 + I⊗ p0),
differing from q, m−1 p by the terms−q0, m−1 p0, the variances of which
by (3.6.57) are proportional to ℏ and thus tend to zero. Moreover, by
(3.6.58) the best quantum accuracy
min
M
R{M}= gx DS(q)+ gv Ds(m−1 p)+ ℏm−1√gx gv
tends to the classical expression gx DS(q)+ gv DS(m−1 p) for the joint
measurement of coordinate and velocity. Thus in the classical limit the
optimal quantum measurement passes smoothly into the classical mea-
surement of the observablesq and m
−1 p and the unphysical discontinuity
is eliminated.
3.7. Dynamicsofaquantumparticleinonedimension
The purpose of this section is to show that the Galilean relativity deter-
mines not only quantum kinematics but also all possible dynamics, i.e.,
temporal evolutions of quantum objects. In this approach the “correspon-
dence principle”, establishing a connection between some classical and
quantum quantities, which was /g192rst introduced as an empirical rule, turns
out to be a logical consequence of the Galilean covariance of the theories.
To include temporal evolution one needs to consider the full Galilean
group of the transformations
ξ
′= ξ+ x+ vτ, τ ′= τ+ t.
Any such transformation is characterized by the three parameters(x,v,t ),
the law of composition of transformations being given by
(x1,v 1, t1)(x2,v 2, t2)= (x1+ x2+ v1t2,v 1+ v2, t1+ t2).

109 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
According to the general scheme of Section 3.1 one looks for irreducible
projective unitary representations(x,v,t )→ W
x,v,t of the Galilean group.
As Bargmann and Wigner showed, the relation (3.1.6) for the Galilean
group can be always reduced to the form
W
x1,v1,t1 Wx2,v2,t2 = exp
[
−iμ
2 (x1v2− x2v1 + t2v1v2)
]
× Wx1+x2+v1t2,v1+v2,t1+t2 .
(3.7.60)
The restriction of this relation to the subgroup of the kinematical
transformations (x,v,0) gives the CCR (3.3.22) for the operatorsW
x,v ≡
W−x,−v,0. Since we already know the description of the representations
of a kinematical group, we can use (3.7.60) to study the relation between
kinematics and dynamics, i.e., between {W
x,v} and the one-parameter
unitary group of time evolution {Vt}≡{ W0,0,t}. From (3.7.60) it fol-
lows that
V∗
t Wx,v Vt = Wx−vt,v.
Putting here x= 0 and v= 0 we get the two basic relations
V∗
t Uv Vt = W−vt,v, (3.7.61)
V∗
t Vx Vt = Vx. (3.7.62)
According to Stone’s theorem, Vt = exp(−itH ), where H is a self-
adjoint operator called the Hamiltonian. We shall give arguments show-
ing that (3.7.61) and (3.7.62) determine the form of H, namely, (3.7.61)
implies
H= P2
2μ+ v(Q), (3.7.63)
where v(·) is a real-valued function, and the additional restriction (3.7.62)
leads to the unique, up to an additive constant, form of the Hamiltonian
H= P2
2μ. (3.7.64)
Introduce the time-varying observables
Q(t)= V∗
t QVt, P(t)= V∗
t PVt.
Then differentiating (3.7.61) with respect tov and using (3.4.34), (3.4.37)
and (2.4.49) we get
Q(t)= Q+ tμ−1 P. (3.7.65)

110 Alexander Holevo
Similarly differentiating (3.7.62) with respect to x and using (3.4.33) we
get
P(t)= P. (3.7.66)
In what follows we shall proceed partly heuristically since the complete
proofs would take too much place here. Differentiating (3.7.65) with
respect to t we get
[H, Q]=μ
−1 P.
This is an inhomogeneous linear equation; its solution H is the sum of
a particular solution H0 and the general solution v of the corresponding
homogeneous linear equation [v, Q]=0. Since the representation is
irreducible, then the general solution of this equation is v = v(Q),a s
follows from consideration in the Schr ¨odinger representation. To show
that H0 = P2/2μ is a particular solution of the inhomogeneous equation
we need the identities
i[ f (Q), P]=− f′(Q), i[Q, f (P)]=− f′(P). (3.7.67)
The /g192rst identity follows from the fact that in the Schr¨odinger represen-
tation[ f (x)d/dx− d/dxf (x)]ψ(x) =− f′(x)ψ(x), the second one is
obtained similarly in the momentum representation. Putting in it f (P)=
P2/2μ we get i[ Q, P2/2μ]=− P/μ as required. Thus we have for-
mally deduced (3.7.63) from (3.7.61). Differentiating (3.7.66) with re-
spect to t we get[H, P]=0, whence by (3.7.67) v
′(Q)= 0 and (3.7.64)
follows up to a constant.
Thus the full Galilean relativity determines essentially uniquely the
Hamiltonian of a free quantum particle; if an external /g192eld is involved,
then the spatial homogeneity requirement (3.7.62) should be omitted and
the restricted Galilean relativity (3.7.61) gives the general form (3.7.63)
of the Hamiltonian for a particle in the external /g192eld.
To explain the nature of the constant μ and other terms constituting
the Hamiltonian consider a quantum state S
ψ for which the coordinate
probability distribution|ψ(ξ)|2dξ is sharply peaked near the mean value
E(Q). Therefore the quantum object in the state Sψ behaves as a “par-
ticle” localized near the point E(Q). Supplying the expectations which
refer to the time t with the corresponding index we obtain from (3.7.65)
by averaging and differentiating
d
dt Et(Q)= Et(μ−1 P). (3.7.68)
This means that the classical velocity of the particle is Et(μ−1 P) as is to
be expected from the kinematical meaning of the observable μ−1 P (see

111 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Section 3.3). Since the object displays itself as a classical particle, its
“classical mass” m can be measured; the classical momentum which is
de/g192ned as the product of the mass by the velocity ism(d/dt)E
t(Q) =
Et(ℏP), where ℏ = m/μ. Therefore p = ℏP in the classical limit
corresponds to the momentum observable. Differentiating formally the
last equation we get
m d
2
dt2 Et(Q)= ℏEt(i[H, P]).
Taking into account (3.7.67) and (3.7.63) we obtain i[H,P]=i[v( Q),P]=
−v′(Q), whence redenoting Q= q
m d2
dt2 Et(q)=− Et(ℏv′(q)).
This is the Newton equation for the classical object with mass m and
the potential energy V(q) = ℏv(q). Putting E = ℏH we can rewrite
(3.7.63) in the form
E= p2
2m + V(q),
completely corresponding to the classical expression representing the to-
tal energy as the sum of the kinetic energyp
2/2m and the potential energy
V(q). Therefore E= ℏH corresponds to the energy observable.
The main concern of quantum mechanics is the temporal evolution
of observed quantities such as probabilities or expectation values. An
expectation value E
t(X) referring to the time t can be written in the two
equivalent forms ES(X(t))= ESt (X), where X(t)= V∗
t XVt and St =
Vt SV∗
t . The description in which states are kept /g192xed and observables
are time-varying as in the conventional form of classical mechanics, is
called the Heisenberg picture. The dual description corresponding to the
second form of E
t(X) is called the Schr¨odinger picture and is widely
used in quantum mechanics.
If the initial state is pure, S=| ψ)(ψ|, then St =| ψt)(ψt| is also pure
with ψt = Vtψ. Assuming ψ∈ D (H) we have by (2.4.49)
ℏidψt
dt = Eψt; ψ0 = ψ.
This is the general dynamical equation determining the temporal evolu-
tion of state vectors. Taking into account (3.7.63) we get in the Schr ¨o-
dinger representation
i∂ψ
t(x)
∂t =− ℏ
2m
∂2ψt(x)
∂x2 + V(x)
ℏ ψt(x). (3.7.69)

112 Alexander Holevo
The ratio ℏ= m/μ essentially involved in this equation can be measured
in experiments in which the object displays non-classical (wave) proper-
ties. The constant ℏ turns out to be ℏ= h/2π where h is the Planck’s
constant. Existence of the universal constant ℏ means that there is a nat-
ural unit of mass; the constant ℏ is just the coef/g192cient relating it with
the classical unit of mass. If the mass is measured in natural units, then
ℏ= 1; we shall often use this convention.
3.8. Timeobservable.
The“time-energy”uncertaintyrelation
The Stone-von Neumann uniqueness theorem implies that any pair of
canonically conjugate observables is essentially the canonical Schr¨odinger
pair (3.4.35), (3.4.36). In particular both operators are necessarily un-
bounded from above and below. From (3.7.63) it follows that if as usual
the potential v(·) is bounded from below, the energy observable is also
bounded from below. Therefore the energy observable cannot have a
canonically conjugate observable represented by a self-adjoint operator.
For the reason to be explained below this means the nonexistence of a
self-adjoint operator representing time observable. However time mea-
surements are quite common experimentally, and a theoretical represen-
tation for them in quantum mechanics should exist. We shall show a way
to resolve the dif/g192culty using the broader concept of measurement.
Consider the family of states
S
t = e−itH SeitH , t∈ R, (3.8.70)
corresponding to different values of the time evolution parameter t. The
parameter t describes the backward time shift in the state preparation.
Motivated by the consideration of coordinate measurements in Section3.3
consider the covariance condition
V
∗
t M(B)Vt = M(B−t); t∈ R, B∈ A (R), (3.8.71)
for a measurement M ={ M(dt)} with Vt = exp(−itH ). Denoting by
μM
t
the measurement probability distribution with respect to the state St
we get
μM
t
(B)= μM
0
(B−t); t∈ R, B∈ A (R).
This means that a time shift in the preparation procedure causes the same
shift in the resulting probability distribution. For this reason any M sat-
isfying (3.8.71) if it at all exists can be associated with a measurement of
the time parameter t.

113 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
If the Hamiltonian H is bounded from below, then there are no simple
measurements M={ M(dt)} satisfying (3.8.71), for otherwise (3.8.71)
would be just (3.2.19) for A =− H, G = M and −H would have
the canonically conjugate observable B =
∫
tM (dt). This expresses
appropriately the non-existence of a self-adjoint time observable. How-
ever there are measurements represented by non-orthogonal resolutions
of identity which satisfy the covariance condition (3.8.71).
It is convenient to consider (3.8.71) in the “energy representation” in
which the energy observable E is “diagonal”. For de/g192niteness we shall
/g192rst consider the case of a free particle in one dimension. Since for a free
particle E = p
2/2m, then in the momentum representation (3.4.38) the
energy operator is multiplication by ϵ= η2/2m.W eh a v e
(˜ψ|˜ψ)≡
∫∞
−∞
|˜ψ(η)|2dη
=
√m
2
[∫∞
0
|˜ψ(
√
2mϵ)|2 dϵ√ϵ+
∫∞
0
|˜ψ(−
√
2mϵ)|2 dϵ√ϵ
]
=
∫∞
0
|ψϵ|2dϵ,
(3.8.72)
where
ψϵ= 4
√m
2ϵ
[˜ψ(
√
2mϵ)
˜ψ(−
√
2mϵ)
]
, (3.8.73)
and|ψϵ|2 = ψ∗
ϵψϵ is the squared norm of the two-dimensional vector
ψϵ ∈ C2. The relation (3.8.73) describes the transformation from the
momentum representation to the energy representation in which the en-
ergy operator is multiplication by ϵand the time evolution group{Vt} is
just multiplication by{exp(−itϵ/ℏ)}. The space of energy representation
is thus the space L 2
K(0,∞) of the functions with values in K= C2 with
the norm given by (3.8.72). One could write down the representation of
the CCR in
L 2
K(0,∞) but we shall not need it.
In L 2
K(0,∞) consider the operator
T = iℏ d
dϵ
with the domain
D (T)=
{
ψϵ: ψ0 = 0,
∫∞
0
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dϵψϵ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dϵ<∞
}
.

114 Alexander Holevo
Similar to the operator P+ in L 2(0,∞) (see Section 2.4) this is the max-
imal symmetric operator. Analogously to (2.4.54) the spectral measure
of T is the nonorthogonal resolution of identity M(dτ) de/g192ned by
(ψ|M(dτ)ψ) =
[∫
∞
0
∫∞
0
ψ∗
ϵψϵ′ei(ϵ′−ϵ)τ/ℏdϵdϵ′
]dτ
2πℏ (3.8.74)
or formally in Dirac’s notations
(ϵ|M(dτ)|ϵ′)= ei(ϵ′−ϵ)τ/ℏ dτ
2πℏ.
The covariance property (3.8.71) ofM(dτ) follows directly from this def-
inition.
Let ψ∈ D (T), then by (2.6.61) the mean and the variance of T in the
state Sψ are, correspondingly
ESψ (T)= ℏi
∫∞
0
ψ∗
ϵ
d
dϵψϵdϵ,
DSψ (T)= ℏ2
∫∞
0
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dϵψϵ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dϵ− ESψ (T)2,
and D (T)={ ψ: DSψ (T)<∞}. Going back to momentum representa-
tion by (3.8.72) we get
ESψ (T)= mℏi
∫∞
−∞
sgn η
˜ψ(η)√|η|
d
dη
˜ψ(η)√|η| dη,
DSψ (T)= (mℏ)2
∫∞
−∞
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dη
˜ψ(η)√|η|
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dη
|η|− ESψ (T)2.
It follows that
T=mℏi sgnη 1√|η|
d
dη
1√|η|= m sgn p|p|−1/2q|p|−1/2=mp−1 ◦ q,
D (T)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
˜ψ(η):
∫
∞
−∞
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dη
˜ψ(η)√|η|
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dη
|η| <∞
⎫
⎬
⎭ .
In general, assume that the energy operator is the multiplication by
the independent variable ϵin the space
L 2
K(0,∞) where K is a Hilbert
space; this means that the representation space consists ofK-valued func-

115 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
tions ψ(·) on (0,∞) satisfying
∫∞
0 |ψϵ|2dϵ< ∞ where|·| is the norm
in K. Then the operator
T = ℏi d
dϵ;
D (T)=
{
ψϵ: ψ0 = 0,
∫∞
0
|ψϵ|2dϵ<∞
} (3.8.75)
is maximal symmetric in L 2
K(0,∞). Its spectral measure satisfying the
covariance condition (3.8.71) can be constructed analogously to (3.8.74).
We call (3.8.75) the canonical time observable in the energy represen-
tation. Whether it is possible to give an expression for T in momentum
or Schr ¨odinger representation depends on the possibility of an explicit
diagonalization procedure for the energy operator. For example, for the
three-dimensional free particle one obtains T = m∑
3
j=1
p j
|p|2 ◦ qj .
Let us return to the problem of estimation of the time evolution param-
eter t in the family (3.8.70). Assume that we are interested in measuring a
distinguished moment in the history of the quantum object, this moment
having the property that shifting in time the preparation of the basic state
leads to the same shift of the distinguished moment. Typical quantities
of such kind are “arrival times” or “passage times” ˜T related to our time
observable T as ˜T = const.−T . Then the inequality (3.2.12) implies
that the variance of any unbiased estimate X of such a time quantity is
bounded from below by the quantity inversely proportional to the energy
uncertainty D
t(E)≡ DS(E)
Dt(X)≥[ 4Dt(H)]−1 = ℏ2[4Dt(E)]−1. (3.8.76)
As we have seen the set of unbiased estimates of t is not empty, since
it contains the observable T− ES(T). Indeed, by Section 3.2 an estimate
corresponding to a covariant measurement is unbiased up to a constant.
Thus (3.8.76) implies the uncertainty relation of the type (3.3.30)
D
S(T)· DS(E)≥ ℏ2/4.
Another interesting example of an unbiased estimate of the time evo-
lution parameter of a free quantum particle of mass m is given by ˆT =
(m/¯p)· q, where the mean momentum ¯p = ES(p) is assumed to be
non-zero. By (3.7.68)
d
dt Et(ˆT)= m
¯p
d
dt Et(q)= 1
¯p Et(p)= 1,
since the mean momentum of a free particle is conserved. To explain the
meaning of this estimate let the basic stateS be the minimum-uncertainty

116 Alexander Holevo
state described in the momentum representation by the function
˜ψ(η)= (2πσ 2
p)−1/4 exp
[
−(η−¯p)2
4σ 2
p
]
. (3.8.77)
Then physically (3.8.70) describes the “wave packet moving with the ve-
locity ¯p/m”. Apparently (3.8.77) does not belong to the domain of the
time operator T (since in particular ˜ψ(0)̸=0) and therefore D
S(T)=
∞. However it does not mean that the “arrival time of the wave packet”
cannot be measured with /g192nite variance; one can useˆT which corre-
sponds to measuring t by measuring the coordinate of the “wave packet”
and dividing it by the known velocity ¯p/m. The variance of this mea-
surement is /g192nite for (3.8.77) and grows ast
2σ 2
p/¯p2 with t →∞ , while
for a covariant measurement the variance would be constant.
Finally we want to show that there is a modi/g192ed form of “canonical
conjugateness” between the energy and time observables. Obviously, on
a dense domain the Heisenberg type CCR[T, H]=iℏ I holds. Moreover
there is a kind of the Weyl CCR. Consider the energy shift operators in
L 2
K(0,∞)
Peψϵ=
{
ψϵ−e; ϵ≥ e,
0; ϵ< e
(see Figure 3.5). Apparently P∗
e Pe = I , Pe P∗
e ≤ I , e > 0. The family
{Pe; e≥ 0} constitutes a semigroup of isometric operators in L 2
K(0,∞).
Using (3.8.74) one gets
Pe =
∫
eieτ/ℏ M(dτ),
where M(dτ) is the spectral measure of T= iℏd/dϵand formally Pe =
exp(ieT/ℏ). The fact that Pe are not unitary is strictly connected to the
non-self-adjointness of T . From the de/g192nition ofPe we obtain the rela-
tions
V∗
t PeVt = eiet/ℏ Pe
P∗
e Vt Pe = e−iet/ℏVt; t∈ R, 0≤ e,
(3.8.78)
which are algebraically similar to (3.2.17).
Also there is the time representation in which the observable T is di-
agonal. Just as the momentum representation is obtained via the Fourier
transform from the Schr ¨odinger representation, the time representation

117 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
ψϵ ψϵ ψϵPϵ
ψϵPϵ
e0e 0ϵ
*
Figure3.5.
can be de/g192ned through the Fourier transform of the energy representa-
tion
˜ψ(t)= 1
√
2πℏ
∫∞
0
eiϵt/ℏψϵ dϵ.
The Hilbert space which is obtained in this way from L 2(0,∞) is called
the Hardy class H 2 for the half-plane. A reader may elaborate the time
representation of the CCR for the case of a free particle.
3.9. Quantumoscillatorandphasemeasurement
The relation (3.7.63) gives a formal expression for the Hamiltonian H;
to de/g192ne quantum dynamics,i.e., the group of unitary operators Vt =
exp(−itH ), t ∈ R, the operator H needs to be essentially self-adjoint.
Proving this property for various potentialsV(·) is one of the main math-
ematical problems of quantum mechanics. The other one is spectral anal-
ysis of the Hamiltonian. These problems have been intensively studied;
some indications to the literature can be found at the end of this chapter.
They are not in the scope of our book and we restrict ourselves to one
example which is both very simple and important.
Consider the energy operator
E= 1
2m (p2+ m2ω2q2), (3.9.79)
which corresponds to the classical expression for the energy of a har-
monic oscillator with the mass m and the angular frequency ω. Putting
m= 1 to simplify formulas we get the formal Hamiltonian
H= 1
2ℏ
⎫
−ℏ2 d2
dξ2 + ω2ξ2
⎬
(3.9.80)

118 Alexander Holevo
in the Schr ¨odinger representation. Since H is the sum of two noncom-
muting unbounded operators, the question arises whether (3.9.80) de/g192nes
an essentially self-adjoint operator.
The expression (3.9.80) is de/g192ned at least on
S (R), which is an in-
variant subspace of p, q and any polynomial in p and q. Introducing on
S (R) the operators
a= 1√
2ℏω
(ωq+ ip), a∗ = 1√
2ℏω
(ωq− ip),
we have (ϕ|aψ) = (a∗ϕ|ψ) for ϕ, ψ ∈ S (R). Later we shall extend a
and a∗ so that a∗ will be the adjoint of a in the sense of Section 2.4. The
relations for a, a∗ are the same as those de/g192ning the complex amplitude
of the classical oscillator.
The Heisenberg CCR (3.3.31) in terms of a, a∗ takes the form
[a, a∗]= I. (3.9.81)
This equation holds at least onS (R). The energy operator takes the form
E= ℏω(a∗a+ 1
2). (3.9.82)
Following Dirac we construct the complete orthonormal system of eigen-
vectors of the operator
N = a
∗a (3.9.83)
and hence obtain the self-adjoint extensions of N and E.
Consider the vector of the oscillator ground state |0) ≡| 0, 0; ℏ/2ω)
which according to (3.5.43) is represented by the function
(ξ|0)=
⎫πℏ
ω
⎬−1/4
exp
⎫
−ωξ 2
2ℏ
⎬
in the Schr ¨odinger representation. From (3.5.41) it follows that (ωq+
ip)|0)= 0 whence
a|0)= 0, N|0)= 0,
so that|0) is eigenvector of N with zero eigenvalue. De/g192ne
|n)= 1√
n!
(a∗)n|0); n= 0, 1,... (3.9.84)
Then by (3.9.81)
a|n)=√n|n− 1), a∗|n)=
√
n+ 1|n+ 1). (3.9.85)

119 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
It follows that
N|n)= n|n); n= 0, 1,...,
so that|n) is an eigenvector of N with the eigenvalue n.
In the Schr¨odinger representation
(ξ|n)= 1√
n!
[ 1√
2ℏω
]n⎫
ωξ− ℏ d
dξ
⎬n ⎫πℏ
ω
⎬−1/4
exp
⎫
−ωξ 2
2ℏ
⎬
=
√
ω
πℏ
1
2nn! Hn
⎫√ω
ℏξ
⎬
exp
⎫
−ωξ 2
2ℏ
⎬
,
(3.9.86)
where Hn(·) are the Hermite polynomials. It is known that the functions
(3.9.86) form a complete orthonormal system in L 2(R) so that
∞∑
n=0
|n)(n|= I. (3.9.87)
Therefore any vector ψ can be represented as
|ψ)=
∞∑
n=0
|n)(n|ψ),
where (n|ψ); n = 0, 1,... , is a square-summable sequence of complex
numbers. Therefore states and observables can be represented by ma-
trices acting in l
2. In particular, the CCR (3.3.22) can be written in the
matrix form. This is called the Fock representation. The isometric trans-
formations from the Schr ¨odinger representation to the Fock representa-
tion and viceversa are give by
(n|ψ)=
∫
(n|ξ)(ξ|ψ)dξ, (ξ |ψ)=
∑
n
(ξ|n)(n|ψ),
where the kernel (ξ|n)= (n|ξ) is de/g192ned by (3.9.86).
The self-adjoint extension of N is now given by
D (N)=
{
ψ:
∞∑
n=0
n2|(n|ψ)|2 <∞
}
,
N|ψ)=
∞∑
n=0
n|n)(n|ψ); ψ∈ D (N),

120 Alexander Holevo
as follows from spectral Theorem 2.4.1. This can be shown to be the
unique self-adjoint extension of the operator (3.9.83) de/g192ned on
S (R).
De/g192ning
D (a)= D (a∗)=
{
ψ:
∞∑
n=0
n|(ψ|n)|2 <∞
}
,
we have (a)∗ = a∗, (a∗)∗ = a and N = a∗a.
According to (3.9.82) we obtain the self-adjoint extension of the en-
ergy operator E. Obviously the system|n); n= 0, 1,... forms the basis
of eigenvectors of E with
E|n)= ℏω
⎫
n+ 1
2
⎬
|n); n= 0, 1,...
This relation shows that the spectrum of the oscillator energy consists of
discrete series (n+
1
2)ℏω; n = 0, 1,... Physicists call the variable n
number of quanta, so that |n) describes the n-quanta state. The operator
N presents the observable number of quanta. Since according to (3.9.84)
a diminishes the “number of quanta” by one, it is called the annihilation
operator (of a quantum). For similar reason a∗ is called the creation
operator.
Since the Hamiltonian H = ℏ−1 E is diagonal in the Fock represen-
tation, dynamics of a quantum oscillator is described very simply in this
representation, namely
V
t|ψ)=
∞∑
n=0
e−iω(n+1/2)t|n)(n|ψ). (3.9.88)
The n-quanta states are thus the stationary, i.e., time-invariant states. In
the Heisenberg picture the quantum dynamics takes the form which is
similar to classical equations. Introducing time-varying operators
a(t)= V
∗
t aVt, a(t)∗ = V∗
t a∗Vt,
we obtain using (3.9.84) and (3.9.87)
a(t)= e−iωt a, a(t)∗ = eiωt a∗. (3.9.89)
Expressing p, q back through a, a∗ by the relations
p=
√
2ℏωa− a∗
2i , q=
√
2ℏ
ω
a+ a∗
2 , (3.9.90)

121 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
we obtain for p(t)= V∗
t pVt , q(t)= V∗
t qVt
p(t)= p cos ωt− ωq sin ωt, q(t)=q cos ωt+ pω−1 sin ωt; (3.9.91)
these relations are formally the same as the solutions of the equations of
motion for the classical harmonic oscillator.
The oscillator dynamics is periodical in the sense thatV
t+2π/ω = Vt for
all t as follows from (3.9.88). Therefore the transformation (3.8.70) of a
state S corresponding to the time shiftt is equivalent to the transformation
Sθ = eiθ N Se−iθ N , (3.9.92)
where θ = (−ωt)(mod 2π) varies in[0, 2π). Since the eigenvalues of
N are integers, then exp (iθ N) = exp i(θ+ 2πk)N so that θ → Vθ =
exp(iθ N) is a unitary representation of the additive group of[0, 2π) mod-
ulo 2π . This group T is the same as the group of rotations of the unit
circle. We shall call θ in (3.9.92) the phase parameter.
To elucidate what measurements should be associated with the phase
parameter consider the covariance condition
V∗
θ M(B)Vθ = M(B−θ ); θ∈[ 0, 2π),
where Vθ = exp(iθ N), and B−θ is the shift (mod 2π) of the set B ⊂
[0, 2π). A resolution of identity satisfying this condition is given by the
symbolic matrix elements in the Fock representation
(n|M(dθ)|n′)= ei(n−n′)θ dθ
2π . (3.9.93)
As we shall show in Chapter 4 this measurement can be singled out from
all covariant measurements of the phase parameter by an optimality re-
quirement. We call (3.9.93) thecanonical phase measurementin the Fock
representation.
We shall also show that there is no simple covariant measurement ofθ.
Thus there is no phase observable in the conventional sense. To show that
the resolution of identity (3.9.93) is not orthogonal consider the operators
P=
∫
2π
0
eiθ M(dθ), P∗ =
∫2π
0
e−iθ M(dθ). (3.9.94)
From (3.9.93), taking into account that
(2π)−1
∫2π
0
exp i(n− n′)θ dθ= δnn′

122 Alexander Holevo
we get the matrix representation
P=
∞∑
n=1
|n− 1)(n|, P∗ =
∞∑
n=1
|n)(n− 1|. (3.9.95)
It follows that
PP∗ = I, P∗ P= I−| 0)(0|,
so that P∗ is isometric but not unitary as it would be if (3.9.93) were an
orthogonal resolution of identity.
From (3.9.85) and (3.9.95) one gets the relations
a= P|a|, a∗ =| a|P∗,
where|a|=
√
a∗a=
√
N, which are the noncommutative analog of the
de/g192nition of phase for the classical oscillator:a=| a| exp iθ. Also from
(3.9.95) follow the relations between the unitary group{Vθ; 0≤ θ< 2π}
and the discrete semigroup of isometric operators{(P∗)n; n= 0, 1,... }
V∗
θ (P∗n)n Vθ = e−inθ(P∗)n; Pn Vθ(P∗)n = einθ Vθ;
0≤ θ< 2π, n= 0, 1,...,
(3.9.96)
which are analogous to the time-energy relations (3.8.78). Thus, though
there is no strict canonical conjugateness between phase and number of
quanta, a weakened form of the conjugateness expressed by the last equa-
tion holds.
Similarly to the time representation one can introduce thephase repre-
sentation in the space of the functions of the form
ψ(θ) =
∞∑
n=0
e−inθ(n|ψ); 0≤ θ< 2π.
The Hilbert space obtained in this way from l2 is called the Hardy class
H 2 for the unit circle. The operatorP∗ acts as multiplication by exp(−iθ)
in this space. The displacement operators Wx,v and thus the representa-
tion of the CCR can be constructed in this space but we shall not pursue
this matter.
3.10. Thecoherent-staterepresentation
An important role in the theory of quantum oscillator and related topics
is played by the minimum-uncertainty states which are reparametrized

123 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
by introducing complex variable ζ = (2ℏω)−12(ωQ+ iℏP). Putting
Wζ = WQ,ℏP and taking into account that ℏ = μ−1 since m = 1w e
rewrite the CCR (3.3.22) in the form
Wζ1 Wζ2 = eiI mζ1¯ζ2 Wζ1+ζ2 . (3.10.97)
Then denoting|ζ) =| P, Q; ℏ/2ω) we can rewrite (3.5.44) as
|ζ) = Wζ|0), (3.10.98)
where|0) is the vector of the oscillator ground state. The states |ζ)(ζ|
are called the oscillator coherent states, the explanation of the name to be
found in quantum optics where they are especially useful.
Rewriting (3.5.41) in the complex form we get
a|ζ) = ζ|ζ), ζ ∈ C, (3.10.99)
so that{|ζ)} forms a continual system of eigenvectors of the annihilation
operator a. Distinct from eigenvectors of a self-adjoint operator they are
not orthogonal; namely, (3.10.98) and (3.10.97) imply
(ζ1|ζ2)= exp[−1
2(|ζ1|2+| ζ2|2− 2¯ζ1ζ2)]. (3.10.100)
The completeness relation (3.5.45) takes the form
∫
C
|ζ)(ζ|d2ζ
2π = I, (3.10.101)
where d2ζ = 1
2 dP dQ. Applying this to a vector ψ∈ H we obtain
|ψ)=
∫
C
|ζ)(ζ|ψ) d2ζ
π .
This formula establishes the one-to-one correspondence between the vec-
tors ψ of the Hilbert space of an irreducible representation of CCR and
the functionsψ(ζ) = (ζ|ψ) of the complex variable. Since by (3.10.101)
(ψ|ϕ)=
∫
C
(ψ|ζ)(ζ|ϕ) d2ζ
2π ,
the spaceH is isometrically embedded into the spaceL 2(C) of complex-
valued square-integrable functions of ζ . The image of H is a proper
subspace of L 2(C) which we are going to describe.

124 Alexander Holevo
Putting ζ2 = 0 in (3.10.100) we obtain that the oscillator ground state
vector gives rise to the function (ζ|0) = exp(−|ζ|2/2). Therefore by
(3.10.99) the functions representing n-quanta state vectors (3.9.83) are
(ζ|n)= 1√
n!
(ζ|(a∗)n|0)=
¯ζn
√
n!
e−|ζ|2/2; n= 0, 1,... (3.10.102)
Since ψ∈ H is uniquely presented as
|ψ)=
∞∑
n=0
cn|n),
∞∑
n=0
|cn|2 = (ψ|ψ) <∞,
then the function ψ(ζ) = (ζ|ψ) has the form
ψ(ζ) = f (ζ) exp(−|ζ|2/2), (3.10.103)
where f (ζ) = ∑¯cnζ n/
√
n! is a holomorphic function of ζ ∈ C. More-
over
∫
| f (ζ)|2 exp(−|ζ|2)d2ζ< ∞. Thus the image of H is the Hilbert
space E 2(C) of the complex-valued functions (3.10.103) with the inner
product
(ψ1|ψ2)=
∫
C
ψ1(ζ)ψ 2(ζ) d2ζ
π =
∫
C
f1(ζ) f2(ζ)e−|ζ|2 d2ζ
π . (3.10.104)
Any bounded operator X in E 2(C) is an integral operator with the ker-
nel (ζ1|X|ζ2) since by (3.10.101)
(ζ1|Xψ)=
∫
C
(ζ1|X|ζ2)(ζ2|ψ) d2ζ2
π .
In particular the displacement operator Wζ has the kernel
(ζ1|Wζ|ζ2)= exp[−1
2(|ζ1|2+| ζ|2+| ζ2|2)+¯ζ1ζ2+¯ζ1ζ−¯ζζ 2],
as follows from (3.10.97) and (3.10.100). This de/g192nes the representa-
tion of the CCR in
E 2(C), which is sometimes called the coherent-state
representation. The transformations from this representation to the Fock
representation and viceversa are given by the kernel (3.10.102); those to
the Schr¨odinger representation by the kernel
(ξ|ζ) = (πℏ/ω)
−1/4 exp
[
−
⎫√ω
2ℏξ− ζ
⎬2 /
2−| ζ|2/2
]
,
which can be derived from (3.5.42).

125 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The coherent-state representation diagonalizes the creation operatora∗
since in E 2(C) it is just the operator of multiplication by ¯ζ : (ζ|a∗ψ) =
¯ζ(ζ|ψ) . The annihilation operator a is ∂/∂¯ζ+ 1
2ζ . Let us show that the
nonorthogonal resolution of identity
M(d2ζ) =| ζ)(ζ|d2ζ
π
is in a sense a spectral measure of a∗. Applying formally to (3.10.101)
operators a∗ and a we obtain
a∗ =
∫
C
¯ζ M(d2ζ), a=
∫
C
ζ M(d2ζ).
To give these relations precise meaning we remark that forψ∈ D (a∗)
∥a∗ψ∥2 =
∫
|ζ|2|(ψ|ζ)|2 d2ζ
π .
Indeed, by (3.10.104) and (3.10.99)
∥a∗ψ∥2 =
∫
|(a∗ψ|ζ)|2 d2ζ
π =
∫
|ζ|2|(ψ|ζ) 2 d2
π ζ.
Thus
D (a∗)=
{
ψ:
∫
|ζ|2|(ψ|ζ)|2 d2ξ
π <∞
}
.
For ψ∈ D (a∗) the integral
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|M(d2ζ)ψ) is convergent and so are
the integrals (ϕ|a∗ψ)=
∫¯ζ(ϕ|M(d2ζ)ψ) , (ϕ|aψ)=
∫
ζ(ϕ|M(d2ζ)ψ) .
To sum up, the operators a∗ and M(d2ζ) are connected by the relations
D (a∗)=
{
ψ:
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|M(d2ζ)ψ)< ∞
}
;
∥a∗ψ∥2 =
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|M(d2ζ)ψ), ψ ∈ D (a∗);
(ϕ|a∗ψ)=
∫
¯ζ(ϕ|M(d2ζ)ψ), ϕ,ψ ∈ D (a∗),
(3.10.105)
which are similar to those connecting a maximal symmetric operator with
its spectral measure (Section 2.4). Applying to (3.10.101) the operatora
m
from the left and the operator (a∗)n from the right we obtain
am(a∗)n =
∫
C
ζ m¯ζ n M(d2ζ).

126 Alexander Holevo
The order of the operatorsa and a∗ in this formula is important since they
do not commute. An operator expression in which all a∗ follow all a is
called normally ordered. The above relation can be generalized to
F(a, a∗)=
∫
F(ζ,¯ζ) M(d2ζ),
where F(ζ,¯ζ) is a function representable by a power series inζ ,¯ζ which
converges rapidly enough and F(a, a∗) means the normally ordered ex-
pression.
One may wonder what is the property of the creation operatora∗ which
enables the spectral representation (3.10.105). Recall that a bounded op-
erator X in
H is called normal if[X, X∗]=0; this is equivalent to
∥Xψ∥=∥X∗ψ∥,ψ ∈ H. A densely de/g192ned (unbounded) operatorX
is normal if D (X) = D (X∗) and∥Xψ∥=∥X∗ψ∥,ψ ∈ D (X).F o r
a normal operator X there is a unique orthogonal resolution of identity
E(d2ζ) on C such that
D (X)=
{
ψ:
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|E(d2ζ)ψ)< ∞
}
;
∥Xψ∥2 =
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|E(d2ζ)ψ); ψ∈ D (X);
(ϕ|Xψ)=
∫
ζ(ϕ|E(d2ζ)ψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ D (X).
Loosely speaking, normal operators are diagonalizable but may have a
complex spectrum.
A densely de/g192ned operatorY in
H is called subnormal if it can be
extended to a normal operator X in a Hilbert space ˜H ⊃ H, i.e., Yψ =
Xψ, ψ ∈ D (Y)⊂ D (X). The operator Y is subnormal if and only if
there is a resolution of identity M(d2ζ) such that
D (Y)⊆
{
ψ:
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|M(d2ζ)ψ)< ∞
}
;
∥Yψ∥2 =
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|M(d2ζ)ψ); ψ∈ D (Y);
(ϕ|Yψ)=
∫
ζ(ϕ|M(d2ζ)ψ); ϕ,ψ ∈ D (Y).
(3.10.106)
Indeed if X is a normal extension of Y with the spectral measure E(d2ξ),
then the resolution of identity
M(d2ζ) = ˜EE (d2ζ)˜E,

127 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
where ˜E is the projection from ˜H onto H, satis/g192es (3.10.106). Con-
versely let M(d2ζ) be a resolution of identity satisfying (3.10.106), and
let E(d2ζ) be its Naimark extension (see Section 2.5) in a Hilbert
space ˜H. Then X =
∫
ζ E(d2ζ) (with the corresponding domain) is a
normal operator satisfying
∥Xψ∥2 =
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|E(d2ζ)ψ) =
∫
|ζ|2(ψ|M(d2ζ)ψ) =∥Yψ∥2
for ψ ∈ D (Y). From the last relation in (3.10.106) it follows that
˜EX ψ = Yψ, ψ ∈ D (Y). Therefore by the second relation ∥Xψ∥2 =
∥Yψ∥2 =∥˜EX ψ∥2 whence Xψ = ˜EX ψ = Yψ, ψ ∈ D (Y),a n d X is
an extension of Y .
Any densely de/g192ned symmetric operator is subnormal since by The-
orem 2.4.3 it admits a spectral representation (3.10.106) with M(d2ζ)
concentrated on R. In particular the operator (3.8.75) in L 2
K(0,∞) rep-
resenting the time observable is subnormal; its normal extension is the
self-adjoint operator ℏid/dϵin
L 2
K(R). An example of a bounded sub-
normal operator is the operatorP∗ given by (3.9.95). Its normal extension
is the unitary operator∑∞
n=−∞
|n)(n−1| in the Hilbert space ˜H spanned
by the orthonormal basis{|n); n= 0,±1,... } which is composed of the
basis in the Fock space H, corresponding to nonnegative n and by addi-
tional orthonormal vectors, corresponding to negative values of n. Since
(3.10.105) is (3.10.106) for the creation operator a∗ it follows that a∗ is
subnormal. To construct its normal extension consider the commuting
extension (3.6.54) of the canonical pair Q, P. In terms of a, a
∗ it is
˜a= a⊗ I0+ I⊗ a∗
0, ˜a∗ = a∗ ⊗ I0+ I⊗ a0,
where˜a,˜a∗ are normal. Let|0)00(0| be the ground state in H0. Identify-
ing H with the subspace of ˜H = H ⊗ ˜H0 consisting of vectors of the
form|ψ)⊗| 0)0, ψ ∈ H,w eh a v eH ⊆ ˜H. The operator ˜a∗ is then an
extension of a∗ since
˜a∗[|ψ)⊗| 0)0]= a∗|ψ)⊗| 0)0+| ψ)⊗ a0|0)0 = a∗|ψ).
We have seen that to different physical quantities including those
which are not represented by self-adjoint operators correspond different
representations in which the quantity has the especially simple “diagonal”
form. All these representations are unitary equivalent; moreover transfor-
mations from one representation to another are given by explicit kernels.
The choice of the representation plays a secondary role simplifying cal-
culations; in fact any calculation can be translated from the language of
one representation to another as well as performed in abstract form in-
volving only the CCR (3.3.22).

128 Alexander Holevo
3.11. Representationsoftherotationgroup
andangularmomenta
In the case of the three-dimensional Cartesian space one looks for irre-
ducible representations of the Galilean group of transformations (3.1.1).
We shall restrict ourselves to kinematical aspects of a quantum particle
in three dimensions and consider the transformations
ξ′= Rξ+ x+ vτ. (3.11.107)
The parameters of the kinematical group are the spatial shift x, the rel-
ative velocity v and the rotation matrix R and we look for irreducible
representations (x, v, R)→ Wx,v,R of the group. An essentially new ele-
ment as compared to the one-dimensional case is rotation and we /g192rst put
x= 0, v = 0 and consider the representations R→ W
R of the rotation
group.
By Euler’s theorem any rotation R is a rotation Rn,ϕ around an axis n
through an angle ϕ. Here n is the unit vector in the direction of the axis.
For a /g192xedn the family{Rn,ϕ} constitutes the one-parameter group and
the operators Vϕ = WRn,ϕ form a unitary representation of this group. By
Stone’s theorem
Vϕ = exp(−iϕLn),
where Ln is a self-adjoint operator. Let{ej} be a Cartesian frame so that
n= n1e1+ n2e2+ n2e3 with∑n2
j = 1. For small values of ϕ the matrix
of the rotation Rn,ϕ is approximately
Rn,ϕ ≈ I− ϕ
∑
j
n j Dj , (3.11.108)
where
I=
⎡
⎣
100
010
001
⎤
⎦ , D
1 =
⎡
⎣
00 0
00 1
0−10
⎤
⎦ ,
D
2 =
⎡
⎣
00−1
00 0
10 0
⎤
⎦ , D
3 =
⎡
⎣
010
−100
000
⎤
⎦
in the frame {e
j}. The matrices D1, D2, D3 satisfying the commutation
relations
[D1, D2]=− D3, [D2, D3]=− D1, [D3, D1]=− D2 (3.11.109)

129 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
constitute what is called the Lie algebra of the rotation group. Let L j ≡
Le j be the in/g192nitesimal generator of the one-parameter group of rotations
around the coordinate axis ej ; j = 1, 2, 3. From the general represen-
tation theory it follows that the operators i L j ; j = 1, 2, 3 constitute a
representation of the Lie algebra, i.e.,
[L1, L2]=i L3, [L2, L3]=i L1, [L3, L1]=i L2. (3.11.110)
Moreover
Ln =
3∑
j=1
n j L j , (3.11.111)
so that
WRn,ϕ = exp
[
−i
3∑
j=1
ϕj L j
]
, (3.11.112)
where ϕj = ϕnj ; j= 1, 2, 3.
A usual procedure for /g192nding representations of the group is /g192rst to
/g192nd representations of the Lie algebra,i.e., concrete operators L j ; j =
1, 2, 3, satisfying (3.11.110), which is a simpler problem, and then to
construct the representations of the group by formula (3.11.112). In this
way it is found that for any /g192nite dimensiond ≥ 2 there exists exactly
one irreducible representation J
1, J2, J3 of the Lie algebra and the cor-
responding irreducible projective unitary representation of the rotation
group
R→ U(R)= exp
[
−i
3∑
j=1
ϕj Jj
]
(3.11.113)
in d-dimensional Hilbert space. We shall describe this representation in
some detail in the simplest case d= 2.
Introducing σj = 2Jj we can rewrite the commutation relations
(3.11.110) in the form
[σ1,σ 2]=2iσ 3, [σ2,σ 3]=2iσ 1, [σ3,σ 1]=2iσ 2.
The solution of these equation is unique to a factor and is given by matri-
ces
σ
1 =
[01
10
]
,σ
2 =
[0 −i
i0
]
,σ 3 =
[10
0−1
]
,
which are called the Pauli matrices. They satisfy
σ
1σ2 = iσ3,σ 2σ3 = iσ1,σ 3σ1 = iσ2. (3.11.114)

130 Alexander Holevo
Any Hermitean (2×2)-matrix can be represented as a unique linear com-
bination of the unit matrix and the Pauli matrices. In particular, for a
density matrix
S=
1
2(I+ θ1σ1+ θ2σ2+ θ3σ3),
where θj are the Stokes parameters introduced in Section 1.2. The re-
lations (3.11.114) make the calculations with matrices presented in this
form very convenient. In particular the exponents (3.11.113) are given by
U(R)= exp
⎫
− i
2
3∑
j=1
ϕjσj
⎬
= I· cos ϕ
2− i
3∑
j=1
ϕjσjϕ−1 sin ϕ
2,
ϕ=
√
ϕ2
1 + ϕ2
2 + ϕ2
3.
(3.11.115)
The representation is essentially projective since,e.g., for ϕ1 = 2π, ϕ2 =
ϕ3 = 0 relation (3.11.115) gives−I and not I .
For any other value of d there is an orthonormal basis in the repre-
sentation space in which, say, J3 has the diagonal form. Namely, the
eigenvalues of J3 are− j,− j+ 1,... j− 1, j, where 2 j+ 1= d, so that
J3 =
j∑
n=− j
m|m)(m|, (3.11.116)
where|m) are the eigenvectors. That the differences of the eigenvalues
are integral numbers should be expected; indeed the rotation through the
angle 2π results in the initial position and therefore exp(−2πiJ
3)= γ I ,
where γ = exp(iα) with α real. It follows that the eigenvalues of J3 have
the form α′+ n where n are integers. The expression for U(R) in this
basis will appear later in Section 4.10. The irreducible representations
of the rotation group are conventionally indexed by the number j, taking
values 0,
1
2 ,1 , 3
2,... (to j = 0 corresponds the trivial one-dimensional
representation).
We can now describe irreducible representations of the kinematical
group. Let K = Cd be d-dimensional complex space and L 2
K(R3) the
space of vector-functions ψ(ξ) on R3 with values in K with the /g192nite
squared norm given by
∥ψ∥2 =
∫∫∫
∥ψ(ξ)∥2dξ1 dξ2 dξ3.

131 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The relation
Wx,v,Rψ(ξ)= exp[iμv· (ξ− x/2)]U(R)ψ(R−1(ξ− x)) (3.11.117)
where U(R) act in the space K, i.e., on components of the vector ψ(ξ)
at each point ξ, de/g192nes a projective unitary representation of the kine-
matical group called the Schr ¨odinger representation. Remark that if we
leave aside rotations, i.e., put R= I we obtain an obvious generalization
of the Schr ¨odinger representation (3.4.32) for the one-dimensional case.
The irreducibility then easily follows from the irreducibility of (3.4.32)
and{U(R)}. Any (continuous) projective unitary representation of the
kinematical group is unitary equivalent to the Schr¨odinger representation
with some values of μ and d. The type of the representation is there-
fore completely determined by the pair of “quantum numbers”: the mass
m= ℏμ and the number j= (d− 1)/2 called spin of the object.
To explain the meaning of the number j recall that it is the largest
eigenvalue of the operator J
3. We now consider the kinematical meaning
of the operators Lk, Jk. Let /g192rstj = 0. Then putting x= 0, v = 0i n
(3.11.117) we obtain the representation R→ WR of the rotation group in
L 2(R) with
WRψ(ξ) = ψ(R−1ξ).
To obtain the expression for Lk in the Schr ¨odinger representation con-
sider the in/g192nitesimal rotations (3.11.108). Takingn1 = 0, n2 = 0,
n3 = 1 which corresponds to rotations around e3 we get
Vϕψ(ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3)≈ ψ(ξ1+ ϕξ2,−ξ2− ϕξ1,ξ 3)
≈
[
1− ϕ
⎫
ξ1
∂
∂ξ2
− ξ2
∂
∂ξ1
⎬]
ψ(ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3),
whence
L3 = i−1
⎫
ξ1
∂
∂ξ2
− ξ2
∂
∂ξ1
⎬
(3.11.118)
at least on S (R),o r l3 = q1 p2 − q2 p1, where l3 = ℏL3 and qj = ξj
are the position observables, pj = ℏi−1∂/∂ξ j are the momentum observ-
ables in the Schr ¨odinger representation. For l1 = ℏL1 and l2 = ℏL2
similar relations hold with the circular permutation of the indices. Intro-
ducing vector notations l=[ l
1, l2, l3] etc. we can write them in the form
l= q× p, which is the same as the expression for the vector of angular
momentum in classical mechanics. The operators l1, l2, l3 are therefore
called the orbital angular momentum observables about the correspond-
ing axes.

132 Alexander Holevo
Returning to the case of arbitrary spin we remark that the operators Jk
arise from representation of the rotation group in the same way asLk and
satisfy the same commutation relations. One may loosely imagine sk =
ℏJk as “internal” angular momenta of the quantum object. They are called
the spin angular momentum observables. The in/g192nitesimal generators of
the representation of rotation group obtained from (3.11.117) areLk+ Jk ;
this is interpreted by saying that the total angular momentum is the vector
sum of the orbital and the spin angular momenta.
If the spatial degrees of freedom are irrelevant, then the object is de-
scribed by the (2 j+ 1)-dimensional Hilbert space K with the represen-
tation R→ U(R) of the rotation group in K. In particular for j =
1
2 we
arrive at the statistical model of the spin- 1
2 particle described in Section
1.5. Let us con/g192rm the expression (1.5.23) for Pr{θout|θin} by calculation
based on the representation theory. Let S=| in)(in| be the density opera-
tor in the two-dimensional space describing the state of the particle after
it has passed the /g192rst /g192lter andX =| out)(out| be the test corresponding
to the second /g192lter. Ifϕ is the angle between the directions of the two /g192l-
ters, then up to an irrelevant factor the vector|out) is U(R
n,ϕ)|in), where
n is an appropriate axis. Taking (in|=[ 1, 0] we obtain from (3.11.115)
Pr{θout|θin}=Tr SX =| (in|out)|2 = cos2 ϕ
2,
as required.
Quantum mechanics makes possible the explanation of the Stern-Ger-
lach phenomenon. In the absence of the magnetic /g192eld there are no priv-
ileged directions and any state in K corresponds to one and the same
energy value ϵ
0 determined by spatial degrees of freedom. Introduc-
tion of the magnetic /g192eld breaks the symmetry; the Hamiltonian describ-
ing the spin degrees of freedom in the presence of the magnetic /g192eld
B=[ B
1, B2, B3] can be shown to be
H=− λ(σ1 B1+ σ2 B2+ σ2 B3).
As expected it is invariant under rotations around the direction of B.W e
can take B =[ 0, 0, B], then H =− λBσ3 and therefore H has two
eigenvalues±λB. Thus instead of states with equal energy ϵ0 there are
two states with the energies ϵ0 ± λB. Particles with the different energy
values are de/g193ected diversely by the anisotropic magnetic /g192eld which
results in splitting of the beam in the Stern-Gerlach experiment.
This explanation gives an extremely simpli/g192ed idea of how the quan-
tum mechanics can explain the structure of energy spectra based on sym-
metry properties. Consideration of more complicated models requires

133 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
more knowledge in the representation theory and approximate methods
of quantum mechanics and is out of the scope of our book.
3.12. Measuringtheangleofrotation
If the apparatus preparing quantum stateS is turned around an axis through
an angle ϕ the new state will be
Sϕ = e−iϕL SeiϕL, (3.12.119)
where L is the in/g192nitesimal generator of the groupVϕ = exp(−iϕL), ϕ∈
R, constituting the unitary representation of the group of rotations around
the given axis. Since rotations through angles differing by 2 πk result in
the same position of the apparatus, we may assume that the parameter ϕ
– the angle of rotation – varies in [0, 2π) and the relevant shifts group
is the group T as for the phase parameter. Having in mind to describe
measurements of the angle of rotation consider the covariance condition
V
∗
ϕ M(B)Vϕ = M(B−ϕ); ϕ∈[ 0, 2π), B∈ A ([0, 2π))
(3.12.120)
where{M(B)} is a measurement with values in the interval[0, 2π), B−ϕ
is the shift of the set B modulo 2π. We are going to describe a canonical
solution of this relation.
Consider /g192rst the case of zero spin. Passing to the spherical coordinates
ξ1 = ρ sin θ cos ϕ, ξ 2 = ρ sin θ sin ϕ, ξ 3 = ρ cos θ;
ρ≥ 0, 0≤ ϕ< 2π, 0≤ θ<π ,
and letting ψ(ξ)= ψ(ϕ,θ,ρ) we get
∥ψ∥2 =
∫∫∫
|ψ(ϕ,θ,ρ) |2dϕ(sin θ dθ)(ρ 2 dρ).
It follows that H = Hϕ ⊗ Hθ ⊗ Hρ , where Hϕ = L 2([0, 2π)) and
Hθ , Hρ are Hilbert spaces of functions of θ and ρ correspondingly. The
operator Vϕ′act only on the variable ϕ
Vϕ′ψ(ϕ,θ,ρ) = ψ(ϕ− ϕ′,θ,ρ) , (3.12.121)
therefore we can restrict our considerations to Hϕ = L 2([0, 2π)).W e
may call it the angular representation. Consider in Hϕ the operator /Phi1of
multiplication byϕ. According to Section 2.3 this is a Hermitean operator
with the spectral representation of the type (2.3.31)
/Phi1=
∫2π
0
ϕE(dϕ),

134 Alexander Holevo
with the orthogonal spectral measure
E(B)=1B(ϕ); B∈ A ([0, 2π)), (3.12.122)
or, symbolically, E(dϕ) =| ϕ)(ϕ|dϕ. A straightforward veri/g192cation
shows that {E(B)} satis/g192es the covariance requirement (3.12.120). As
we shall show in Chapter 4 the measurement (3.12.122) can be singled
out from all covariant measurements of the angle of rotation by an op-
timality property. We call it the canonical measurement of the angle of
rotation and /Phi1the canonical angle observable . Returning to Cartesian
coordinates and taking e
3 for the rotation axis we can write (3.12.122) in
the form
E(B)=1K(B)(ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3),
where K(B) is the wedge in the coordinate space de/g192ned by
K(B)={[ ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3]:ξ 1 = ρ cos ϕ, ξ 2 = ρ sin ϕ; 0≤ ρ; ϕ∈ B}.
It is instructive to pass to the angular momentum representation which
diagonalizes the operator L.I n Hϕ = L 2([0, 2π)) consider the orthonor-
mal basis{|m); m = 0,±1,... } of functions (2π)−1/2 exp(imϕ). Then
the action of operators Vϕ′according to (3.12.121) is given by
Vϕ|m)= e−imϕ′
|m). (3.12.123)
It follows that L is the diagonal operator
L|m)= m|m); m= 0,±1,...
with D (L) ={ ψ :| ∑
m m2|(ψ|m)|2 < ∞}. The angle measurement
(3.12.122) is given by the matrix elements
(m|E(B)|m′)=
∫
B
ei(m′−m)ϕ dϕ
2π; B∈ A ([0, 2π)),
or symbolically
(m|E(dϕ)|m′)= ei(m′−m)ϕ dϕ
2π; m, m′= 0,±1,... (3.12.124)
This is analogous to the expression (3.9.93) for the canonical phase mea-
surement, the role of N is now played by−L. Mathematically the differ-
ence is that the eigenvalues of N are nonnegative integral numbers while
for L they extend to all integers. This stipulates the fact that the canoni-
cal phase measurement is not simple contrary to the measurement of the
angle.

135 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Returning to Hϕ we /g192nd thatL is the operator i−1d/dϕ (which agrees
with (3.11.118)) with D (L) ={ ψ : ψ(0) = ψ(2π),
∫
|ψ′(ϕ)|2dϕ<
∞}. Therefore L and /Phi1satisfy the Heisenberg type commutation rela-
tion[/Phi1,L]=i I . However in spite of boundedness of /Phi1this holds not
on D (L) but on the smaller subspaceD0(L)={ ψ: ψ(0)= ψ(2π)= 0,∫
|ψ′(ϕ)|2dϕ< ∞} since D (L) is not an invariant subspace of /Phi1. In-
troducing the unitary operator U = exp i/Phi1=
∫
exp(iϕ)E(dϕ) we obtain
from (3.12.124)
U =
∞∑
m=−∞
|m)(m− 1|, (3.12.125)
so that U is the analog of P∗ for the phase. Introducing the discrete
group of unitary operators Um; m = 0,±1,... we get from (3.12.123)
the relations
V∗
ϕ Um Vϕ = eimϕUm, Um VϕU−m = eimϕ Vϕ;
0≤ ϕ< 2π; m= 0,±1,...,
(3.12.126)
expressing a form of conjugateness between the angle and the angular
momentum.
We now turn to the case of non-zero spin j and restrict ourselves to
the case where only spin degrees of freedom are involved. This is so if,
e.g., all the components of the vector
ψ(ξ) in (3.11.117) are spherically
invariant functions of ξ. Thus we adopt that states are described by den-
sity matrices in (2 j+ 1)-dimensional space K. The rotation through an
angle ϕ results in the state change
Sϕ = e−iϕ J Seiϕ J , (3.12.127)
where J is the spin angular momentum about the axis of rotation. Put
Vϕ′= exp(−iϕ′J) and consider the covariance condition (3.12.120).
Let{|m); m=− j,− j+ 1,..., j} be the orthonormal basis in which
J has the diagonal form (3.11.116), then Vϕ′acts on|m) as in (3.12.123)
with the only difference thatm varies now in the /g192nite range. The relation
(m|M(dϕ)|m′)= ei(m−m′)ϕ dϕ
2π; m, m′=− j,− j+ 1,..., j
(3.12.128)
de/g192nes a covariant measurement of the angle of rotation which we call the
canonical angle measurement for the spin degrees of freedom. Contrary
to the case of spatial degrees of freedom considered above this measure-
ment is not simple. To see it introduce the operators
E
± =
∫2π
0
e±iϕ M(dϕ). (3.12.129)

136 Alexander Holevo
If M(dϕ) were an orthogonal resolution of identity, then E± would be
mutually adjoint unitary operators. From (3.12.128) we get
E+ =
j∑
m=− j+1
|m)(m− 1|, E− =
j∑
m=− j+1
|m− 1)(m|, (3.12.130)
so that E+ is analogous to the operator U = exp(i/Phi1)for the spatial
degrees of freedom. However
E− E+ = I−| j)( j|, E+ E− = I−|− j)(− j|, (3.12.131)
so that E± are not unitary, nor even isometric. From (3.12.123) and
(3.12.130) we get the analog of the relations (3.12.126)
V∗
ϕ Em
+ Vϕ = eimϕ Em
+, V∗
ϕ Em
− Vϕ = e−imϕ Em
−;
0≤ ϕ< 2π, m=− j,− j+ 1,..., j.
(3.12.132)
Taking m = 1 and differentiating with respect to ϕ we obtain the useful
commutation relations
[E+, J]=− E+, [E−, J]= E−. (3.12.133)
3.13. Comments
Section 3.1. The importance of symmetry groups in quantum mechan-
ics is well known (see, e.g., Weyl [141], Wigner [145]). The idea of
classifying quantum systems according to representations of a symme-
try group belongs to Wigner [144], who applied it /g192rst to the relativistic
quantum mechanics corresponding to the Poincar ´e (or inhomogeneous
Lorentz) group; in this connection see also Bogoljubov, Logunov and
Todorov [16], Gelfand, Minlos and Shapiro [41], Shirokov [124] and
Varadarajan [136]. The classi/g192cation of nonrelativistic quantum “par-
ticles” according to the representations of the Galilei group was given by
In¨onu and Wigner [70] and Bargmann [6]. In the last paper the general
theory of projective unitary representations was developed. The decom-
position of arbitrary continuous representation into unitary ones takes
place for the type I groups [75]. A good introduction to the advanced ap-
plications of the group methods in the theory of elementary particles can
be found in Bogoljubov’s lectures [15]. Of special importance to quan-
tum mechanics are dynamical symmetries, i.e., symmetries of the Hamil-
tonian related to conservation laws, see, e.g., Malkin and Man’ko [93].
Proofs and discussion of the Wigner theorem and its generalizations
can be found in Bargmann [8], Hunziker [68], Kadison [74], Varadarajan
[135], Davies [27].

137 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
There is an approach to description of unstable quantum particles us-
ing Galilei and Poincar ´e semigroups, which differ from corresponding
groups in that they include only positive time shifts ( cf. in particular
Zwanziger [149], Lanz, Lugiato and Ramella [84]). The restriction to
positive time shifts has the motivation that a preparation procedure can-
not be arbitrarily delayed without interfering with a subsequent measure-
ment.
Section 3.2. For the proof of Proposition 3.2.1 see, e.g., Bargmann [6]
and Varadarajan [136]. A survey of the results concerning the Weyl CCR
and its relations to (3.2.20) can be found in Putnam [116].
The Mandelstam-Tamm inequality was derived in [96] for the case of
the time parameter t. To obtain the time-energy uncertainty relation the
authors introduce “standard time” /Delta1tde/g192ned by
E
t+/Delta1t(X)− Et(X)= (/Delta1t)−1
∫t+/Delta1t
t
Dτ (X)dτ.
Integrating the inequality then gives/Delta1t·/Delta1H≥ 1
2 where /Delta1H=√Dt(H).
However Krylov and Fock [83] pointed out that the resulting inequality
cannot be considered as an analog of the Heisenberg coordinate-momen-
tum uncertainty relation; in the de/g192nition of/Delta1tthe quantities E
τ (X),
Dτ (X); t ≤ τ ≤ t + /Delta1tcannot be obtained from a single “statisti-
cal ensemble” since measuring X at a time t changes the state and vio-
lates the Hamiltonian evolution. This discussion gives an idea of what
kind of problems the traditional quantum measurement theory is faced
with. The statistical approach from the point of view of quantum esti-
mation theory seems to be free from these dif/g192culties. This approach
was /g192rst suggested by Helstrom [52, 53] who independently rederived
the Mandelstam-Tamm inequality in the context of quantum estimation
theory. The more general presentation given here follows Holevo [66].
Section 3.3. Proposition 3.3.1 is a particular case of the theorem de-
scribing the general form of a multiplier ω(g
1, g2) on the additive group
of Rd (see Bargmann [6], Jauch [71] and Varadarajan [136]). The kine-
matical meaning of the observables P, Q is discussed in Jauch [71].
Section 3.4. The original proof of the uniqueness theorem was given in
von Neumann’s paper [138]. This can also be considered as a particular
case of Mackey’s imprimitivity theorem [91] (see Jauch [71]).
Section3.5. Minimum-uncertaintystateswere /g192rst introduced by Schr¨o-
dinger; the completeness relation was obtained by Bargmann [7] and
Glauber [42].

138 Alexander Holevo
Section 3.6. The problem of joint measurement has been considered
from different points of view by von Neumann [138], Urbanik [133],
Gordon and Louisell [44], She and Heffner [123], Prugove /g225cki [115],
Davies [27] and others. The present treatment follows Holevo [58, 61]
and Helstrom [53].
Section 3.7. The equation initially discovered by Schr ¨odinger corre-
sponds to the eigenvalue problem Hψ = λψ. Schr ¨odinger came to it
attempting to write the equation for the de Broglie stationary “waves of
matter”. The correspondence principle was introduced as a formal “pos-
tulate” prescribing quantum analogs for classical quantities. The fact
that it follows from the more fundamental Galilean relativity was real-
ized later (In ¨onu and Wigner [70], Bargmann [6]). This section follows
closely to Jauch [71].
We shall mention here very brie/g193y two interesting connections between
quantum mechanics and the probabilistic theory of stochastic processes.
Replacing formally it by t transforms the Schr ¨odinger equation into the
parabolic equation of stochastic diffusion processes theory, the group{V
t}
of unitary operators being replaced by a contraction semigroup. There is
the important Feynmann-Kac formula relating quantum dynamics with
a stochastic diffusion process. Nelson [102, 103], who gave it a simple
proof based on the Trotter product formula, considered the stochastic dif-
fusion process as a hidden variables model for quantum dynamics. Use of
the Feynmann-Kac formula just as an analytic tool opens interesting pos-
sibilities both for quantum mechanics and for stochastic processes (see
Simon [128]).
The other connection reveals in the recent work on quantum stochastic
processes allowing to describe the irreversible (in particular, Markovian)
evolution of “open” quantum systems. For this see in particular Davies
[27], Accardi, Frigerio and Lewis [1] and Gorini et al. [45].
Section 3.8. Dif/g192culties with the de/g192nition of time observable were dis-
cussed in great detail by Allcock [3], where a reader can /g192nd other refer-
ences. Attempts to use the expressions like iℏd/dϵgo back to Pauli [107]
however there was no room for them in the conventional form of quan-
tum measurement theory. The presentation here follows Holevo [66]
where the case of three dimensional free particle was also treated. For
other approaches to the time-energy uncertainty relation see Ekstein and
Siegert [32], Wigner [146] and Malkin and Man’ko [93].
Section 3.9. Concerning mathematical problems of quantum mechanics
see, e.g., Reed and Simon [118]. The quantum oscillator is considered
in almost all textbooks on quantum mechanics; we follow the original

139 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
presentation of Dirac (see also Louisell [88] for interesting formal algebra
with creation-annihilation operators).
A correct approach to phase of quantum oscillator via the operator P
∗
was suggested by Sussking and Glogower [131] (see also Carruthers and
Nieto [20], V olkin [137]). The canonical phase measurement appeared in
Holevo [67]. For Hardy classes see, e.g., Halmos [48].
The phase observable, similarly to the time observable is an “eternal”
topic in foundations of quantum mechanics. One of the most known
more recent suggestions – the Pegg-Barnett “selfadjoint phase opera-
tor” [193] – is interesting in that it gives a concrete example of approx-
imation of the nonorthogonal resolution of the identity (3.9.93) in the
in/g192nite-dimensional Hilbert space by orthogonal ones. The fact that or-
thogonal resolutions of the identity are weakly dense in the set of all
resolutions of the identity in the in/g192nite-dimensional Hilbert space was
observed already in Naimark’s paper [100] (for more detail see [178],
§2.1.3.)
Consider the Hilbert space H with the basis{|n); n = 0, 1,...}, and
its /g192nite-dimensional subspacesH
N , generated by the vectors{|n); n=
0, 1,..., N}.I n HN the orthonormal basis of Pegg-Barnett “phase vec-
tors” is introduced
|θN,k)= 1√
N+ 1
N∑
n=0
einθN,k|n), θ N,k = 2πk
N+ 1; k= 0, 1,..., N,
with the corresponding orthogonal resolution of the identity
MN (B)=
∑
θN,k∈B
|θN,k)(θN,k|.
One can then de/g192ne selfadjoint “phase operator”
/Theta1N =
N∑
k=0
θN,k|θN,k)(θN,k|
in HN or better, the unitary operator e i/Theta1N = ∑N
k=0 eiθN,k|θN,k)(θN,k|. If
|ψ) is arbitrary vector inH with /g192nitely many nonzero coef/g192cients(n|ψ),
then for N large enough
μ(N)
Sψ (B)= (ψ|MN (B)|ψ)=
∑
θN,k∈B
|(θN,k|ψ)|2
=
∑
θN,k∈B
1
N+ 1
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
N∑
n=0
e−inθN,k (n|ψ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2

140 Alexander Holevo
are probability measures which weakly converge to the distribution of the
canonical phase measurement (3.9.93):
μ
Sψ (B)= (ψ|M(B)|ψ)= 1
2π
∫
B
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∞∑
n=0
e−inθ (n|ψ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dθ
in the pure state Sψ =| ψ)(ψ|. Recall that weak convergence of probabil-
ity measures means convergence of integrals of all bounded continuous
functions. Similar statement holds also for mixed states.
Section 3.10. The coherent-state representation for many degrees of
freedom was considered by Bargmann [7], Glauber [42], Klauder and
Sudarshan [76]. For the free /g192eld (in/g192nitely many degrees of freedom)
an analogous representation was studied by Berezin [12].
Bounded subnormal operators were introduced by Halmos [48]. See
also Sz.-Nagy [119].
Section 3.11. On the representations of the rotation group in quantum
mechanics see Wigner [145], Jauch [71] and Mackey [92]. For a system-
atic study of the rotation group see Gelfand, Minlos and Shapiro [41] and
/g225Zelobenko [148].
Section 3.12. A consideration of the canonical angle observable for the
spin-zero case in the angular representation was given by Judge [73],
Susskind and Glogower [131] (see also Carruthers and Nieto [20] and the
references quoted therein). For the treatment in the angular momentum
representation in the case of spin degrees of freedom see Helstrom [52]
and Holevo [67].

Chapter 4
Covariant measurements and optimality
4.1. Parametricsymmetrygroups
andcovariantmeasurements
All symmetry groups considered in the previous chapter wereparametric
groups (Lie groups) of transformations. This means that a parametric set
/Theta1={ θ}, i.e., a continuous manifold in a /g192nite-dimensional space is
given and elements of the group G ={ g} act as continuous one-to-one
mappings of the set /Theta1onto itself, g: θ → gθ. Moreover the group G is
itself parametrized in such a way that the group product g1g2 is at least
locally continuous in g1, g2.
The examples are the additive groupR considered as the shift group for
the real line /Theta1= R, the group T of shifts (mod 2π) of the interval /Theta1=
[0, 2π) and the rotation group in the three dimensional Euclidean space
R3. In the last case it is natural to consider the action of the group only
on directions, i.e., unit vectors in R3. Then the rotation group becomes a
group of transformations of the unit sphere /Theta1= S2.
Let G be a parametric group of transformations of a set/Theta1and g→ Vg
be a (continuous) projective unitary representation ofG in a Hilbert space
H. Let M(dθ) be a measurement with values in /Theta1,i.e., a resolution
of identity in H on the σ -/g192eldA (/Theta1)of Borel subsets of /Theta11. The
measurement M(dθ) is covariant with respect to representation g→ Vg
if
V∗
g M(B)Vg = M(Bg−1), g∈ G, (4.1.1)
for any B∈ A (/Theta1), where
Bg ={ θ: θ= gθ′,θ′∈ B}
is the image of the set B under the transformation g. The notion of
covariant measurement was introduced in the previous chapter for con-
1 Since /Theta1is a continuous manifold it is itself a Borel subset in a /g192nite-dimensional space.

142 Alexander Holevo
crete symmetry groups. Here we wish to study it from a general point of
view.
The importance of this notion for quantum theory lies in the fact that
it establishes a correspondence between physical parameters and certain
classes of quantum measurements. Indeed, assume that θ is a parameter
(in general, multidimensional) describing some aspects of the preparation
procedure and S the basic state corresponding to the value θ
0. Then the
transformation g results in the preparation of the new state Sθ = Vg SV∗
g ,
where θ = gθ0. If the measurement M(dˆθ) is then made, the probability
distribution of the results ˆθ of the measurement will be
Pr{ˆθ∈ B|θ}=Tr Sθ M(B), B∈ A (/Theta1).
If M(dˆθ) possesses the covariance property (4.1.1), then
Tr Sθ M(B)= Tr SV∗
g M(B)Vg = Tr SM (Bg−1)
whence replacing B by Bg
Pr{ˆθ∈ Bg|gθ0}=Pr{ ˆθ∈ B|θ0}.
Thus the change of the value of θ is properly re/g193ected by the change
in the resulting probability distribution, and therefore any resolution of
identity M(dθ) satisfying (4.1.1) corresponds to a theoretically admissi-
ble measurement of the parameter θ.
A mathematical problem which naturally arises is to describe all co-
variant measurements of the given parameter θ. We shall give its gen-
eral solution in Section 4.2 and 4.8. Then we shall look for “optimal”
measurements having the best theoretically possible accuracy among all
covariant measurements of the parameterθ. In this way we shall /g192nd that
the “canonical” measurements for various parameters introduced in the
previous chapter are just the typical representatives in the family of the
optimal covariant measurements.
We shall need some general knowledge of parametric groups of trans-
formations. The group G acts transitively on /Theta1if any point θ
0 can be
transformed into any other point θ by some g∈ G. In what follows we
assume that a parametric groupG acts transitively on/Theta1. Then the contin-
uous mapping g→ gθ0 = θ(g) maps G onto the whole/Theta1. This mapping
is one-to-one if and only if thestationary subgroup G0 of transformations
leaving the point θ0 invariant is trivial, i.e., reduces to the identical trans-
formation. For an example consider the shift group of R and /g192x a point
θ0 ∈ R. Any point θ∈ R can be obtained from θ0 by a shift: θ= θ0+ x.
The mapping x → θ0 + x = θ( x) is obviously one-to-one. The same is

143 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
true for the group T acting on[0, 2π). Consider now the rotation group
acting on S2. Fix the “pole” n0 ∈ S2. Any direction n can be obtained
from n0 by a rotation R : n= Rn0; the mapping R → Rn0 = n(R) is
not one-to-one since n(R)= n(RR 0) where R0 is any rotation about the
axis n0.
A measure μ(dg) on the σ -/g192eldA (G) of Borel subsets of G is called
left-(right-)invariant if
μ(gA)= μ(A) (correspondingly μ(Ag)= μ(A)), g∈ G,
where gA ={ g′: g′= g′′, g′′∈ A} and Ag={ g′: g′= g′′g, g′′∈ A}
A∈ A (G).
It is known that any parametric group possesses a left-invariant mea-
sure. If there exists an invariant (i.e., both left- and right-) invariant mea-
sure, then the group is called unimodular. The invariant measure is in
general not /g192nite,i.e., μ(G) ≤+ ∞. If the group is compact (i.e.,i s
a bounded closed manifold in a /g192nite-dimensional space), then any left-
or right-invariant measure is invariant. Moreover it is /g192nite and we shall
normalize it by μ(G)= 1. We shall deal only with unimodular groups.
Now we are interested in measures ν on
A (/Theta1)with are invariant in
the sense that
ν( Bg)= ν( B); g∈ G, B∈ A (/Theta1).
If G0 is also unimodular, then such ν exists. If moreover G0 is compact,
which we assume, then ν can be explicitly constructed from μ by the
relation
ν( B)= μ(θ−1(B)),
where θ−1(B) ={ g : gθ0 ∈ B} is the pre-image of the Borel set B ∈
A (/Theta1). In other words,ν is de/g192ned by the requirement that
∫
G
f (gθ0)μ(dg)=
∫
/Theta1
f (θ)ν(dθ) (4.1.2)
holds for any integrable function f on /Theta1. The compactness ofG0 ensures
the /g192niteness of the measureν (otherwise it may be identically in/g192nite as
the simple example G = R2, /Theta1= R, G0 = R shows). The invariance
of ν follows from the left invariance of μ. Right invariance of μ implies
that ν is the same for any choice of θ0, since if θ1 = g1θ0, then
ν( B)= μ({g: gθ0 ∈ B})
= μ({gg1 : gg1θ0 ∈ B})= μ({g: gθ1 ∈ B}).

144 Alexander Holevo
An example of invariant measure is the Lebesgue measure on R. For the
rotation group acting on S2 the invariant measureν on S2 is up to a factor
the Euclidean area on the unit sphere. The expression for the invariant
measure μ on the rotation group will appear in Section 4.10.
4.2. Structureofcovariantmeasurements
The following simple result will be useful in the study of covariant mea-
surements.
Proposition4.2.1. Let M (dθ) be a measurement covariant with respect
to a projective unitary representation g→ V
g of the parametric group G
of transformations of the set/Theta1. For any density operator S in the Hilbert
space of the representation and for any Borel B∈ A(/Theta1)
∫
G
Tr Vg SV∗
g M(B)μ(dg)= ν( B). (4.2.3)
Proof. By (4.1.1) we get
∫
G
Tr Vg SV∗
g M(B)μ(dg)=
∫
G
Tr SM (Bg−1)μ(dg)
=
∫
G
∫
/Theta1
1B(gθ0)μS(dθ0)μ(dg),
where μS(dθ) = Tr SM (dθ). Using (4.2.3) and the fact that ν does not
depend on the choice of θ0 we obtain that it is equal to
∫
/Theta1
μS(dθ0)
∫
G
1B(gθ0)μ(dg)= ν( B). (4.2.4)
We shall also need a Radon-Nikodym theorem for operator-valued
measures. The following proposition the proof of which is standard will
suf/g192ce.
Proposition4.2.2. Let{M(B);B ∈
A (/Theta1)}be an additive operator-
valued set function dominated by the scalar measure{m(B);B ∈ A (/Theta1)}
in the sense that
|(ϕ|M(B)ψ)|≤m (B)∥ϕ∥∥ψ∥, B∈ A (/Theta1),
for all ϕ, ψ∈ H. Then there exists an operator-valued function P (·) de-
/g192ned uniquely for m-almost allθ ∈ /Theta1(i.e., for all θ with possible ex-
ception of a set of zero m measure ), satisfying ∥P(θ)∥≤1 and such
that
(ϕ|M(B)ψ)=
∫
B
(ϕ|P(θ)ψ)m (dθ), B∈ A (/Theta1),

145 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
for all ϕ, ψ ∈ H.I fM (B)≥ 0 for all B ∈ A (/Theta1), then P(θ) ≥ 0 for
m-almost all θ.
The function P(θ) is called theoperator density of M(dθ) with respect
to m(dθ). We shall write simply M(B) =
∫
B P(θ)m(dθ) or M(dθ) =
P(θ)m(dθ) having in mind the weak convergence of the integral.
To avoid certain technical dif/g192culties we now restrict to /g192nite-dimen-
sional representations g→ Vg.
Theorem4.2.3. Let P0 be a Hermitean positive operator in the represen-
tation space, commuting with the operators{Vg; g∈ G0} and satisfying
∫
G
Vg P0V∗
g μ(dg)= I. (4.2.5)
Then putting
P(gθ0)= Vg P0V∗
g , (4.2.6)
we get an operator-valued function of θ such that
M(B)=
∫
B
P(θ)ν(dθ), B∈ A (/Theta1), (4.2.7)
is a measurement, covariant with respect to the representation g→ Vg.
Conversely for any covariant measurement M (dθ) there is a unique
operator P0 satisfying the above conditions such that M(B) is expressed
through P0 by (4.2.6) and (4.2.7).
Proof. By the condition [P0, Vg]=0, g ∈ G0,w eh a v e P(g1θ0) =
P(g2θ0) if g1θ0 = g2θ0 and therefore the relation (4.2.6) de/g192nes unam-
biguously an operator-valued function of θ∈ /Theta1. Positivity ofP0 implies
M(B)≥ 0 and σ -additivity is a property of the de/g192nite integral (4.2.7).
Using (4.1.2) we have
∫
/Theta1
P(θ)ν(dθ) =
∫
G
Vg P0V∗
g μ(dg)= I (4.2.8)
by (4.2.4) whence M(/Theta1)= I .
To prove the converse statement letd= dim H.
Putting S= d−1 I in (4.2.3) we get Tr M(B)= d−1ν( B), B∈ A (/Theta1).
It follows that (ϕ|M(B)ϕ) ≤ d−1ν( B) for any unit vector ϕ ∈ H .B y
positivity of M(B) and the Cauchy inequality
|(ϕ|M(B)ψ)|≤
√
(ϕ|M(B)ϕ)(ψ|M(B)ψ)≤ d−1ν( B)

146 Alexander Holevo
for unit ϕ, ψ ∈ H, so that {M(B)} is dominated by {d−1ν( B)}.B y
Proposition 4.2.2 there is density P(θ) which is uniquely de/g192ned and
positive for ν-almost all θ, such that
M(B)=
∫
B
P(θ)ν(dθ). (4.2.9)
From the covariance relation (4.1.1)
∫
B
V∗
g P(θ) Vgν(dθ)=
∫
Bg−1
P(θ)ν(dθ)
=
∫
B
P(g−1θ)ν( dθ),
whence by uniqueness of the operator density
V∗
g P(θ) Vg = P(g−1θ), g∈ G,
for ν-almost all θ. A measure-theoretic argument shows that the density
P(θ) can be de/g192ned in such a way that this equality will hold for all
θ ∈ /Theta1. Then puttingP0 = P(θ0) we get (4.2.6) and (4.2.7); the relation
(4.2.4) follows from the normalization M(/Theta1)= I .
The relation (4.2.7) sets up the af/g192ne one-to-one correspondence be-
tween the two convex sets: the set of all covariant measurements M(dθ)
and the set P of Hermitean operators satisfying the conditions of the the-
orem.
Note that taking ν( B) small enough, which is possible in the para-
metric case, we can make ∥M(B)∥< 1 and then M(B) cannot be a
projection. Thus in the case of a /g192nite-dimensional representation of a
parametric symmetry group there are no simple covariant measurements.
4.3. Thecovariantquantumestimationproblem
Let θ be a parameter (in general, multidimensional) describing certain
aspects of the preparation procedure. Then to each value θ from the ad-
missible set /Theta1corresponds a quantum state Sθ in H. Assume that there is
a symmetry group G acting transitively on /Theta1, which has a representation
g→ Vg in H. The family of states {Sθ} is called covariant with respect
to the representation if
Sgθ = Vg Sθ V∗
g; θ∈ /Theta1,g∈ G.

147 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Fix “the initial value” θ0; then it follows that the basic state Sθ0 = S
satis/g192es:S= Vg SV∗
g , g∈ G0, so that we can write
Sθ = Vg SV∗
g ,( θ = gθ0). (4.3.10)
Assume now that the object is prepared in one of the states Sθ , but the
actual value of θ is unknown and the problem is to estimate the value as
accurately as possible based on measurements admitted by quantum the-
ory. This is an obvious generalization of the quantum estimation problem
for the shift parameter discussed in Section 3.2. We shall consider it fol-
lowing the ideas of statistical estimation adapted to quantum theory.
Let us /g192x adeviation function W
θ (ˆθ) which is interpreted as a measure
of deviation of an observed value ˆθ from the actual value θ. We assume
here that it is a continuous function of the arguments satisfying Wθ (ˆθ)≥
Wθ(θ). We shall also assume that it is invariant
Wgθ (gˆθ)= Wθ (ˆθ); g∈ G; θ, ˆθ∈ /Theta1.
For all concrete parametric groups considered here there are some “natu-
ral” deviation functions such as the quadratic deviation (θ−ˆθ)
2 for R.
The mean deviation of the measurement M={ M(dˆθ)} with respect to
the actual value θ is
Rθ{M}=
∫
Wθ (ˆθ)μθ (dˆθ), (4.3.11)
where μθ (dˆθ) = Tr Sθ M(dˆθ) is the probability distribution of the mea-
surement M with respect to the state Sθ . Having in mind to /g192nd the most
accurate measurement of the parameter θ one would like to minimize
(4.3.11) for all values of θ. However this is in general impossible, as is
well known from the classical mathematical statistics: what is good for
one value ofθ may be bad for another. To introduce a reasonable concept
of optimality one has to compromise by forming a single functional of
the quantities
Rθ{M}, θ ∈ /Theta1, which would serve as an integral measure
of accuracy.
Following the classical estimation theory one can form two different
functionals. In Bayes’ approach one averages Rθ{M} with respect to
a prior distribution π(dθ). The measurement minimizing the resulting
Bayes mean deviation
Rπ{M}=
∫
Rθ{M}π(dθ)
is called Bayesian. The quantity Rπ{M} represents the total mean devia-
tion in the situation where θ is itself a random parameter with the known

148 Alexander Holevo
distribution π(dθ). In particular if /Theta1is compact and “nothing is known
in advance” about θ one may take for π(dθ) the “uniform distribution”,
i.e., the normalized invariant measure ν(dθ).
In minimax approach the maximal mean deviation
ˆR{M}=max
θ
Rθ{M}
is subject to minimization. The minimizing measurement is called min-
imax. We shall also call optimal measurements minimizing this of the
other measure of accuracy.
Restricting ourselves here to the case of compact /Theta1and G we shall
show that for a covariant family of states the minima of both Bayes’ and
maximal mean deviations coincide and are achieved on a covariant mea-
surement. This is an analogue of the Hunt-Stein theorem in mathematical
statistics.
The mean deviation (4.3.11) and therefore the Bayes’ mean deviation
are af/g192ne functionals of measurementM.I f /Theta1is compact and W
θ (ˆθ)
is continuous, as assumed, then a Bayesian measurement exists . For the
proof of this assertion and for the detailed discussion of the integrability
questions in the proof of the following theorem the reader is referred to
the comments at the end of this chapter.
Theorem4.3.1. In the quantum covariant statistical estimation problem
described above the minima of the Bayes’ mean deviation
Rν{M} and the
maximal mean deviation ˆR{M} for all /Theta1-measurements are achieved on
a covariant measurement. Moreover, for a covariant measurementM
Rν{M}= ˆR{M}= Rθ{M},θ ∈ /Theta1. (4.3.12)
Proof. Introduce the measurement Mg by putting
Mg(B)= V∗
g M(Bg)Vg, B∈ A (/Theta1),
and note that M is covariant if and only if Mg = M, g ∈ G. From the
assumed covariance of the family{Sθ} and invariance ofWθ (ˆθ) we get by
(4.3.11)
Rθ{Mg}= Rgθ{M}. (4.3.13)
In particular for a covariant measurement the mean deviationRθ{M} does
not depend on θ so that (4.3.12) holds.
Consider the Bayes’ mean deviation
Rν{M}=
∫
Rθ{M}ν(dθ).

149 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Using (4.3.13) we get Rν{M}= Rν{Mg}. Introduce the “averaged” mea-
surement M by
M(B)=
∫
G
Mg−1 (B)μ(dg).
The integral is easily de/g192ned in the sense of the weak convergence and
can be veri/g192ed to determine a covariant measurement. Using (4.3.11) and
changing the order of integration we get
Rν{M}=
∫
Rν{Mg−1}μ(dg)= Rν{M}
and therefore
max
θ
Rθ{M}≥ Rν{M}= Rν{M}.
Since M is covariant, then using (4.3.12)
Rν{M}= Rθ{M}=max
θ
Rθ{M}.
Thus for an arbitrary measurement M we have constructed a covariant
measurement M with the same value of the Bayes’ mean deviation and
possibly smaller value of the maximal mean deviation. Therefore the
minima of both functionals are achieved on a covariant measurement.
The relation (4.3.12) shows that the “naive” approach of minimizing
the mean deviation for all values of θ simultaneously makes sense if one
restricts to covariant measurements. Moreover it is equivalent both to
Bayes’ and minimax approaches and reduces to the minimization of the
mean deviation
Rθ0{M}=
∫
Wθ0 (θ)μθ0 (dθ)
for some particular value θ0.
Consider this problem assuming dim H < ∞. Then we are in the
conditions of Theorem 4.2.3 and the functional Rθ0{M} takes the form
Rθ0{M}=
∫
Wθ0 (θ) Tr V∗
g SVg P0ν(dθ)
= Tr ˆW0 P0,
where
ˆW0 =
∫
/Theta1
Wθ0 (θ) V∗
g SVgν(dθ)=
∫
G
Wθ0 (gθ0)V∗
g SVgμ(dg) (4.3.14)

150 Alexander Holevo
is an operator commuting with all {Vg; g ∈ G0}. Based on an analogy
with mathematical statistics we can call ˆW0 the operator of posterior de-
viation. Thus one has to /g192nd
min TrˆW0 P0 (4.3.15)
over all Hermitean P0 ∈ P. This problem will be effectively solved for
concrete symmetry groups in the following sections.
Finally we shall brie/g193y discuss the noncommutative analog of the clas-
sical maximum-likelihood approach. Formally it corresponds to Bayes’
approach with the uniform prior distribution and the “deviation function”
Wθ0 (θ)=
{
0,θ ̸=θ0,
−∞,θ = θ0.
More precisely de/g192ne the delta-function on/Theta1by the relation
∫
δθ0 (θ) f (θ)ν(dθ) = f (θ0) (4.3.16)
for continuous f (θ). Then minus Bayes’ mean deviation corresponding
to Wθ (ˆθ)=− δθ(ˆθ) is equal to
∫
/Theta1
Tr Sθ M(dθ). (4.3.17)
The precise de/g192nition of such “trace-integrals” is an interesting mathe-
matical problem which will not be discussed here. Note, however, that if
/Theta1is compact and dim
H < ∞ this can be done rather easily. Then as
in the proof of Theorem 4.2.3 one can show that M(dθ) is differentiable
with respect to m(dθ) = Tr M(dθ) so that M(dθ) = P(θ)m(dθ) and
(4.3.17) can be de/g192ned as
∫
/Theta1
(Tr Sθ P(θ))m(dθ). (4.3.18)
The measurement maximizing this functional is called the maximum-
likelihood measurement. As in Theorem 4.3.1 one can show that for a
covariant family of states {Sθ} the maximum is achieved on a covari-
ant measurement. For a covariant measurement (4.2.9) the functional
(4.3.18) takes the form Tr SP
0. Thus to /g192nd the covariant maximum-
likelihood measurement one has to solve the problem to /g192nd
max TrSP0, P0 ∈ P,
which has the same nature as (4.3.15).

151 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
4.4. Measurementsofangularparameters
We are going to apply the estimation theory developed in the previous
section to one-parameter symmetry groups. The simplest example in es-
timation is of the angle of rotation by measurements over the spin degrees
of freedom. According to Section 3.12 the family of states obtained from
the basic state S by rotations through the angles ϕ,0 ≤ ϕ< 2π,i s
represented by
S
ϕ = e−iϕ J Seiϕ J; 0≤ ϕ< 2π, (4.4.19)
where J is the operator of spin angular momentum, corresponding to the
axis of rotation, which has the diagonal form (3.11.116) in the basis of
eigenvectors{|m)}. The index m varies from− j to j where j is the value
of spin.
The relevant symmetry groupG is the group of rotations about the axis
or the group T of shifts (mod 2π) of the interval /Theta1=[ 0, 2π). Operators
V
ϕ = exp(−iϕ J) constitute a /g192nite dimensional unitary representation of
the group. The stationary subgroupG0 is trivial in this case and according
to Theorem 4.2.3 any covariant measurement of the angle of rotation has
the form
M(dϕ)= e
−iϕ J P0eiϕ J dϕ
2π ,
where P0 is a positive operator satisfying (4.2.5), i.e.,
(2π)−1
∫2π
0
e−iϕ J P0eiϕ J dϕ= I.
In the basis{|m)}
(m|M(dϕ)|m′)= ei(m′−m)ϕ pmm′
dϕ
2π , (4.4.20)
where pmm′= (m|P0|m′) and (4.2.5) reduced to pmm = 1. Thus any co-
variant measurement of the angle of rotation for spin degrees of freedom
is given by the matrix elements (4.4.20) where the matrix[p
mm′], with m,
m′varying from− j to j, belongs to the convex set
P={[ pmm′]:[ pmm′]≥0, pmm = 1}.
We now turn to the covariant estimation problem, restricting to the case
of pure states
Sϕ = e−iϕ J|ψ)(ψ|eiϕ J; 0≤ ϕ< 2π. (4.4.21)

152 Alexander Holevo
We shall look for optimal covariant measurement which minimizes the
mean deviation for, say, ϕ
0 = 0. According to Theorem 4.3.1 it is also
optimal in both Bayes’ and minimax senses.
Put γm = (m|ψ)/|(m|ψ)| if (m|ψ) ̸=0; otherwise let γm be an arbi-
trary complex number of unit modulus.
Theorem4.4.1. The covariant measurement
(m|M
∗(dϕ)|m′)= ei(m′−m)ϕγm ¯γm′
dϕ
2π (4.4.22)
is the optimal measurement of angle of rotation ϕ in the family of states
(4.4.21) for any deviation function of the form Wϕ(ˆϕ)= W(ϕ−ˆϕ), where
W(·) is an even 2π-periodic function on R, satisfying
∫2π
0
W(ϕ) cos kϕ dϕ≤ 0; k= 1, 2,... (4.4.23)
Proof. Any function W(·) satisfying the conditions of the theorem can
be represented by Fourier series
W(ϕ)= w0−
∞∑
k=1
wk cos kϕ,
with wk ≥ 0; k = 1, 2,... Using (4.4.20) we obtain the probability
distribution of the covariant measurementM with respect to the state S=
|ψ)(ψ|
μ0(dϕ)=
[∑
m,m′
ei(m′−m)ϕ pmm′(m′|ψ)(ψ|m)
]
dϕ
2π (4.4.24)
where the sum extends over− j≤ m, m′≤ j. By (4.3.11) and (4.4.24)
R0{M}=w 0−
∞∑
k=1
wk
∫2π
0
cos kϕ
∑
m,m′
ei(m′−m)ϕ pmm′(m′|ψ)(ψ|m) dϕ
2π .
The factor multiplying wk is equal to
1
2
∑
m,m′:
|m−m′|=k
(ψ|m)pmm′(m′|ψ).
By the positive de/g192niteness
|pmm′|≤ √pmm · pm′m′= 1, (4.4.25)

153 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
so that
1
2
∑
m,m′:
|m−m′|=k
(ψ|m)pmm (m′|ψ)≤ 1
2
∑
m,m′:
|m−m′|=k
|(ψ|m)|| (m′|ψ)|,
with the equality achieved if and only if pmm′= γm ¯γm′. It follows that
R0{M}≥ R0{M∗}, where
R0{M∗}=w 0− 1
2
∞∑
k=1
wk
∑
m,m′
|m−m′|=k
|(ψ|m)|·| (m′|ψ)|. (4.4.26)
Several comments are in order. The examples of the deviation func-
tions admitted by the conditions of the theorem are (see Figure 4.1)
4 sin2 ϕ
2 = 2− 2 cosϕ,
min{ϕ, 2π− ϕ}= π
2 − 4
π
∞∑
k=0
cos(2k+ 1)ϕ
(2k+ 1)2 ,
⏐
⏐
⏐sin ϕ
2
⏐
⏐
⏐= 2
π − 4
π
∞∑
k=1
cos kϕ
4k2− 1.
The quadratic (mod 2π) deviation min{(ϕ−ˆϕ)2, (2π− ϕ+ˆϕ)2} does
not satisfy (4.4.23). Formally the condition (4.4.23) is satis/g192ed by the
periodic delta-function
−δ(ϕ(mod 2π))=− 1
2π − 1
π
∞∑
k=1
cos kϕ,
which corresponds to the maximum-likelihood approach. In fact the
proof extends to arbitrary periodic generalized functions with w
k ≥ 0
since the value of k in the series de/g192ningR0{M} cannot exceed 2 j,s o
that the series contains only a /g192nite number of nonzero terms. Thus
(4.4.22) is also the covariant maximum-likelihood measurement for the
family (4.4.21).
It is not dif/g192cult to give an alternative abstract characterization of the
functions satisfying (4.4.23). Note that w
0− W(ϕ), ϕ∈ R, is the Fourier
transform of an even measure (concentrated at the integral points) and
therefore is positive de/g192nite. It follows that a 2π-periodic function W(·)
satis/g192es (4.4.23) if and only if∑
j,k
W(ϕj − ϕk)¯cj ck ≤ 0
for any complex cj , such that∑
j cj = 0 and any ϕk ∈ R.

154 Alexander Holevo
π 2πϕ
ϕ
0
4 sin2
2
ϕ
2min (ϕ,2 π - ϕ) |sin   |
Figure4.1.
The theorem shows that the optimal measurement is rather insensitive
to the choice of the deviation functions – a property which is desirable
from the physical point of view.
If the basic state is such that arg (m|ψ) is the same for all values of
m, in particular, if (m|ψ) ≥ 0 for all m, then γ
m = const. and the op-
timal covariant measurement is just the canonical measurement of the
angle of rotation in the angular momentum representation de/g192ned by
(3.12.128). However if arg(m|ψ) varies with m, then the canonical mea-
surement is no longer optimal and its accuracy is worse then the best
possible (4.4.26). The optimal measurement takes into account the prior
information contained in the variations of phase of the complex number
(m|ψ) determined by the basic state S=| ψ)(ψ|.
Note that transforming the basis {|m)} to|m)
′= γm|m) we reduce
the optimal measurement (4.4.22) to the canonical form. The canonical
measurement is thus a tantamount representative in the family of opti-
mal covariant measurements which are obtained one from another by the
aforementioned “gauge” transformations.
The conclusion of this section apply to the phase measurements (see
Section 3.9) and the angle measurements for spatial degrees of freedom
(see Section 3.12) with the only essential modi/g192cation that the indexm
should vary not from − j to j b u tf r o m0t o∞ in the case of phase and
from−∞ to∞ in the second case. The representation of covariant mea-
surements has the same form (4.4.20) with m, m
′varying in the corre-
sponding ranges and Theorem 4.4.1 extends to these cases taking care of
convergence of the series. However in obtaining (4.4.20) we cannot refer
to Theorem 4.2.3 since the representation space is not /g192nite-dimensional
in these cases. The results will follow from the more general theory for
arbitrary representation of the group T to be discussed in Section 4.6.
4.5. Uncertaintyrelationsforangularquantities
To establish the uncertainty relations for such quantities as angle and
phase we must /g192rst introduce a proper measure of uncertainty. The fact
that the angular quantities vary periodically from 0 to 2π makes us reject

155 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
the variance which serves as the measure of uncertainty for quantities
running freely on the whole real line like coordinate and time. In fact
the angular values ϕ= 0 and ϕ= 2π must be considered as “identical”
and the values ϕ ≈ 0, ϕ ≈ 2π as “close” to each other. If we con-
sider an angular distribution μ(dϕ) which is symmetric with respect to
ϕ= π and concentrated at the ends of the interval[0, 2π), then its vari-
ance D(ϕ)=
∫
2π
0 (ϕ− E(ϕ))2μ(dϕ) will be≈ π2 while any reasonable
measure of uncertainty should be almost zero.
Consider the complex random variable exp(iϕ) whose range is the unit
circle. Its variance is equal to
D(eiϕ)=
∫2π
0
|eiϕ − E(eiϕ)|2μ(dϕ)= 1−| E(eiϕ)|2,
where E(eiϕ)=
∫2π
0 eiϕμ(dϕ), μ being the angular probability distribu-
tion. We adopt the following measure of uncertainty
/Delta1(ϕ)= D(eiϕ)
|E(eiϕ)|2 ≡| E(eiϕ)|−2 − 1. (4.5.27)
Note that |E(eiϕ)| is the distance of the center of mass of the distribu-
tion of exp(iϕ) concentrated on the unit circle from the center of the cir-
cle. Therefore /Delta1(ϕ)= 0 for the δ-distributions (complete certainty) and
/Delta1(ϕ)=∞ for the uniform distribution (complete uncertainty) as is de-
sirable.
Let μ(dϕ)= (ψ|M(dϕ)ψ) be the probability distribution of the mea-
surement M={ M(dϕ)} with respect to the pure state S=| ψ)(ψ|.W e
denote the corresponding uncertainty by /Delta1S{M}. Since the state S will
be mostly kept /g192xed we shall omit it from the notations. Then for any
covariant measurement of the angle ϕ
/Delta1{M}≥/Delta1
∗(ϕ)=
[∑
m
|(ψ|m)∥(m− 1|ψ)|
]−2
− 1, (4.5.28)
with the equality achieved for the optimal measurement (4.4.22). In-
deed calculating the expectation of exp (iϕ) with respect to the distribu-
tion (4.4.24) we /g192nd
E(e
iϕ)=
∑
m
(ψ|m)pm,m−1(m− 1|ψ),
whence by (4.4.25)
|E(eiϕ)|≤
∑
m
|(ψ|m)∥(m− 1|ψ)|,

156 Alexander Holevo
and (4.5.28) follows by using (4.5.27). Note that the range of m is arbi-
trary here so that the result applies to the angular measurements for both
spin and spatial degrees of freedom and to phase measurements.
Note that for a covariant measurement M the uncertainty /Delta1{M} is
the same for all the states S
ϕ obtained from S using (4.4.21). Thus the
optimal covariant measurement for the family (4.4.21) is the minimum-
uncertainty measurement for the states of the family. For the canonical
measurement p
mm′= 1 and E(eiϕ) = ∑(ψ|m)(m− 1|ψ). Thus it is
optimal if and only if
⏐
⏐
⏐
∑
(ψ|m)(m− 1|ψ)
⏐
⏐
⏐=
∑
|(ψ|m)(m− 1|ψ)|
which holds if and only if arg (ψ|m)(m− 1|ψ) ≡ ϕ
0 does not depend
on m. This means that Arg (m|ψ) =− mϕ0 + const., i.e., the state
belongs to the family (4.4.21) generated from the basic state satisfying
arg(m|ψ) = const. Otherwise there is a covariant measurement having
smaller uncertainty than the canonical one. The quantity /Delta1
∗(ϕ) in the
right-hand side of (4.5.28) thus represents the intrinsic minimal uncer-
tainty of the angle ϕ in the pure state S=| ψ)(ψ|. We now are going to
establish the uncertainty relation “angle-angular momentum”,
/Delta1
∗(ϕ)· D(J)> 1
4, (4.5.29)
for an arbitrary pure state S=| ψ)(ψ|.
Performing the “gauge” transformation |m)′= γm|m) with γm =
(m|ψ)/|(m|ψ)| we have (m|ϕ) ≥ 0. Thus we can take (m|ψ) ≥ 0.
Then
∑
m
|(ψ|m)(m− 1|ψ)|=
∑
m
(ψ|m)(m− 1|ψ)= (ψ|E+ψ)≡ E+,
where E+ is given by (3.12.130) andX denotes the mean value of X with
respect to the state|ψ)(ψ|. Therefore by (4.5.28)
/Delta1∗(ϕ)= 1−| E+|2
|E+|2 = 1− (C
2
+ S
2
)
C
2
+ S
2 ,
where C and S are the “cosine” and “sine” operators C = 1
2(E+ + E−),
S= 1
2 i(E+− E−). From (3.12.131)
C2+ S2 = I− 1
2[|− j)(− j|+| j)( j|].

157 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Using the fact that E+ = C− iS and D(C)= C2− C
2
, D(S)= S2− S
2
we therefore get
/Delta1∗(ϕ)=[ D(C)+ D(S)+ 1
2(|− j)(− j|+ | j)( j|)]·( C
2
+ S
2
)−1.
From (3.12.133) we obtain
[C, J]=i S, [S, J]=− iC.
By the uncertainty relation (2.6.63) with the right-hand side written in the
commutator form (2.6.65) we obtain
D(C)· D(J)≥
1
4 S
2
, D(S)· D(J)≥ 1
4 C
2
. (4.5.30)
Therefore
/Delta1∗(ϕ)≥ 1
4 D(J)−1+ 1
2[|(ψ|− j)|2+| (ψ| j)|2]·( C
2
+ S
2
)−1.
Since (C
2
+ S
2
)−1 =| E+|−2 = /Delta1∗(ϕ)+ 1, we get
/Delta1∗(ϕ)≥[ 1− 1
2[|(ψ|− j)|2+| (ψ| j)|2]]−1
·[ 1
4 D(J)−1+ 1
2[|(ψ|− j)|2+| (ψ| j)|2]].
(4.5.31)
Omitting the nonnegative term 1
2[|(ψ|− j)|2 +| (ψ| j)|2] we get the in-
equality /Delta1∗(ϕ)≥[ 4D(J)]−1.
Let us show that the equality is never achieved here. If this would be
the case, then (ψ|− j)= (ψ| j)= 0 since we have omitted these terms
in (4.5.31), and (4.5.30) turn into equalities. According to (2.6.64) this is
the case if and only if
[(C−
C)+ iα( J− J)]ψ= 0, [(S− S)+ iβ( J− J)]ψ= 0
for some real α and β (we exclude the case D(J)= 0). Denoting z =
β−iα we have(E−−E−)ψ= z(J− J)ψ whence (m+1|ψ)= cm(m|ψ)
where cm = zm+ E− − z J. Since (− j|ψ) = 0 we obtain by induction
(m|ψ) = 0 for all m which is impossible for a unit vector ψ. Thus the
strict inequality in (4.5.29) is proved.
In the same way we can prove the uncertainty relation for the phase
θ of a harmonic oscillator (see Section 3.9). It follows from (4.5.28) for
any covariant measurement M of θ and for any pure state S=| ψ)(ψ|
/Delta1{M}≥/Delta1∗(θ)=
[∞∑
n=0
|(ψ|n)(n− 1|ψ)|
]−2
− 1.

158 Alexander Holevo
Using the operators P∗, P given by (3.9.95) in place of E+, E− and the
corresponding cosine and sine operators we get
/Delta1∗(θ)≥[ 1− 1
2|(ψ|0)|2]−1·[ 1
4 D(N)−1+ 1
2|(ψ|0)|2],
where N is the number of quanta operator, and the “phase-number of
quanta” uncertainty relation
/Delta1∗(θ) D(N)≥ 1
4.
Finally, for covariant angle measurements in the case of spatial degrees
of freedom (see Section 3.12) we have the inequality (4.5.28) withm run-
ning from−∞ to∞ and the uncertainty relation (4.5.29) withJ replaced
by the operator of orbital angular momentumL. This is obtained by using
the operators U, U∗ given by (3.12.125) in place of E+, E−.
In Section 6.3 we shall derive a general inequality for the uncertainty
of angular parameter valid for arbitrary states.
4.6. Covariantmeasurementsofangularparameter
inthecaseofarbitraryrepresentationofthegroup T
In this section we shall considerably generalize the results of Section
4.4. This will also help us to study the covariant measurements of a shift
parameter in R. Let ϕ → V
ϕ,0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 2π, be a projective unitary
representation of the group T. Since the value ϕ = 2π corresponds to
the identical state automorphism, we must have V2π = exp(ia0) with a0
real. Putting V2πk+ϕ = V k
2π· Vϕ we get a projective unitary representation
of the additive group of R. According to Proposition 3.2.1 it reduces
to the unitary representation ϕ → exp(−iϕ A), where A is self-adjoint.
The condition V2π = exp(ia0) implies that the spectrum of A consists of
eigenvalues of the form m= k+ a, where k are integral numbers, i.e., A
has the spectral representation
A=
∑
m
mE m, (4.6.32)
where Em is the projection onto the invariant subspaceHm corresponding
to the eigenvalue m. The space H is the direct orthogonal sum of these
subspace Hm
H =
⨁
m
Hm, (4.6.33)
which means that for any ψ∈ H
ψ=
∑
m
ψm, ∥ψ∥2 =
∑
m
∥ψm∥2, (4.6.34)

159 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
where ψm = Emψ is the component of the vector ψ in the subspace Hm .
We shall write brie/g193yψ=[ ψm]. Then
exp(iϕ A)ψ=[ exp(imϕ)ψm].
We shall study measurements M(dϕ) with values in[0, 2π) which are
covariant with respect to the representation of the group T. Assuming
that dim Hm ≡ 1 we obtain in particular the case of spin angular mea-
surements considered in Section 4.4 if m=− j,− j+ 1,..., j, the case
of phase measurements if m = 0, 1,... and the case of spatial angular
measurement if m= 0,±1,...
By a kernel we shall mean here a matrix [Kmm′] where Kmm′is a
bounded operator from Hm′to Hm. To a bounded operator K in H
we ascribe the kernel[Em KE m′]. In particular, the unit operator has the
kernel[δmm′Em]. The kernel is positive de/g192nite,[Kmm′]≥0i f
∑
m,m′
(ψm|Kmm′ψm′)≥ 0
for any ψ =[ ψm]. Obviously a positive operator has a positive de/g192nite
kernel.
Theorem4.6.1. A measurement covariant with respect to the represen-
tation of the group T is determined by the kernels
M(B)=
[
K
mm′
∫
B
ei(m′−m)ϕ dϕ
2π
]
; B∈ A ([0, 2π)),
where[Kmm′] is a positive de/g192nite kernel satisfying Kmm = Em.
Proof. Applying (4.2.3) to the representation ϕ→ exp(−iϕ A) we have
∫2π
0
Tr e−iϕ A Seiϕ A M(B)dϕ= mes B,
where mes denotes the Lebesgue measure on[0, 2π). Take for S a density
operator Sm acting in Hm, i.e., Sm Em= Em Sm = Sm. Then
exp(−iϕ A)Sm exp(iϕ A)= Sm
and denoting by Trm the trace in the space Hm we have
Trm Sm Mmm (B)= (2π)−1 mes B,
where Mmm′(B)= Em M(B)Em′. Since it holds for arbitrary Sm in Hm
we have
Mmm (B)= Em
mes B
2π . (4.6.35)

160 Alexander Holevo
From positivity of M(B) and the Cauchy inequality
|(ψm|Mmm′(B)ψm′)|≤ mes B
2π ∥ψm∥·∥ψm′∥,
for all ψm , ψm′. By Proposition 4.2.2
Mmm′(B)=
∫
B
Pmm′(ϕ) dϕ
2π ,
where Pmm′(·) is the operator density satisfying ∥Pmm′(ϕ)∥≤1. Since
Mmm′(B) maps Hm′into Hm so does Pmm′(ϕ). From (4.6.35) Pmm (ϕ)≡
Em; positivity of M(B) implies that the kernel[Pmm′(ϕ)] is positive def-
inite for almost all ϕ. As in the proof of Theorem 4.2.3 the covariance of
the measurement{M(B)} implies
Pmm′(ϕ)= ei(m′−m)ϕ Pmm′(0)
for the proper de/g192nition of the densitiesPmm′(·). Putting Kmm′= Pmm′(0)
we get the assertion of the theorem.
Conversely, any kernel[Kmm′] satisfying the conditions of the theorem
de/g192nes the corresponding covariant measurement, but we shall not prove
it here.
Consider now the covariant estimation problemfor the family of states
S
ϕ = e−iϕ A Seiϕ A, 0≤ ϕ< 2π, (4.6.36)
where S =| ψ)(ψ| is a pure state. Assume that the deviation function
W(ϕ−ˆϕ) is continuous and satis/g192es (4.4.23), then
W(ϕ)= w0−
∞∑
k=1
wk cos kϕ≡
∞∑
k=−∞
vkeikϕ,
where vk ≤ 0 for k ̸=0 and ∑|vk| < ∞. Let M be a covariant mea-
surement de/g192ned according to Theorem 4.6.1 by the kernel[Kmm′]. Then
arguing as in the proof of Theorem 4.4.1 we get
R0{M}=
∑
m,m′
vm−m′(ψm|Kmm′ψm′)
≥
∑
m,m′
vm−m′∥ψm∥·∥ψm′∥,
where ψm are the components of the vector ψ. The equality here is
achieved for the positive de/g192nite kernel
Kmm′= |ψm)(ψm′|
∥ψm∥·∥ψm′∥. (4.6.37)

161 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Similar argument can be given for the deviation function W(ˆϕ− ϕ) =
−δ((ˆϕ− ϕ) (mod 2π)) for which vm ≡− (2π)−1, if we suppose addi-
tionally that∑∥ψm∥<∞.
The operator-valued measure corresponding to the kernel (4.6.37)
M0(dϕ)=
[|ψm)(ψm′|
∥ψm∥·∥ψm′∥ei(m′−m)ϕ
]dϕ
2π
is not a measurement unless dim Hm ≡ 1, for otherwise
E0 ≡
∫
M0(dϕ)=
∑
m
|ψm)(ψm|
(ψm|ψm) ̸=I.
The operator E0 is the projection onto the subspace H0 generated by the
components ψm of the basic vector ψ. Therefore the measure M0(dϕ)
can be extended to a resolution of identity in H by the formula
M∗(dϕ)= M0(dϕ)⊕ M1(dϕ), (4.6.38)
where M1(dϕ) is arbitrary resolution of identity in the orthogonal com-
plement to the subspace H0. Since the states Sϕ are concentrated on H0,
the measurement probability distribution is given by
μϕ(dˆϕ)≡ Tr Sϕ M∗(dˆϕ)= (e−iϕ Aψ|M0(dˆϕ)e−iϕ Aψ)
=
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∑
n
∥ψm∥eim(ˆϕ−ϕ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dˆϕ
2π ,
so that the additional term M1(dϕ) has no in/g193uence on the statistics of
measurement and on the value of mean deviation. In particular, we can
take
M
1(dϕ)= (I− E0)μ(dϕ),
where μ is a probability distribution. Of courseM∗ will be covariant only
if so in M1, which holds for the uniform distribution μ.
If dim Hm is the same for all m, then the subspaces Hm are mutually
isomorphic. Let for each pair m, m′Umm′be an isometric map of Hm′
onto Hm and the system {Umm′} be consistent in the sense that Umm =
Em, Umm′Um′m′′= Umm′′. Then the kernel [Umm′] satis/g192es the conditions
of Theorem 4.6.1. Consider the corresponding covariant measurement
M(dϕ)=[ Umm′ei(m′−m)ϕ] dϕ
2π .

162 Alexander Holevo
If we agree that the maps Umm′“identify” Hm′and Hm we obtain the
“canonical” covariant measurement
M(dϕ)=[ Emei(m′−m)ϕ] dϕ
2π . (4.6.39)
Of course it depends on the way of identifying of the subspaces{Hm}.
The measurement (4.6.39) will be optimal for the family (4.6.36) if
and only if
(ψm|Umm′|ψm′)≡ (ψm|ψm′)=∥ψm∥∥ψm′∥.
This holds if and only if ψm = αm e under the given identi/g192cation of
{Hm}, where αm ≥ 0 and e is a /g192xed vector inHm. Otherwise there is a
covariant measurement which has smaller mean deviation.
4.7. Covariantmeasurementsofashiftparameter
The most important examples of shift parameters onR are the coordinate
x and the time t. We shall /g192rst consider covariant measurements of the
shift parameters from a general point of view.
Consider a projective unitary representation of the shift group of R.
According to Proposition 3.2.1 it reduces to the unitary representation
θ→ e−iθ A, (4.7.40)
where A is a self-adjoint operator in H. There is a form of the spectral
theorem which says that A can be represented as the operator of mul-
tiplication by an independent variable in a direct orthogonal integral of
Hilbert spaces. We shall describe this construction in the particular case
when A has purely Lebesgue spectrum.
In this section we shall proceed rather heuristically considering the sit-
uation as a continuous analog of the discrete one discussed in the previous
section, since a rigorous treatment would take too much place here.
Let /Lambda1be an interval of the real line with the Lebesgue measure on it
and let for almost all λ ∈ /Lambda1a Hilbert space
Hλ be given. The inner
product and the norm in Hλ will be denoted (·|·)λ and∥·∥λ.T h e direct
orthogonal integral of the Hilbert spacesHλ with respect to the Lebesgue
measure
H =
∫
/Lambda1
⨁
Hλ dλ (4.7.41)
is the space of functions ψ=[ ψλ], where ψλ ∈ Hλ, satisfying
∥ψ∥2 ≡
∫
/Lambda1
∥ψλ∥2
λ
dλ<∞. (4.7.42)

163 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
ψλ is called component of vector ψ in Hλ. The inner product in H is
de/g192ned by
(ϕ|ψ)=
∫
/Lambda1
(ϕλ|ψλ)λ dλ. (4.7.43)
We assume that the representation space H decomposes into a direct
orthogonal integral(4.7.41) such that A acts in (4.7.41) as multiplication
by λ:
Aψ=[ λψλ]; ψ=[ ψλ].
If follows that exp (iθ A)ψ =[ exp(iθλ)ψλ]. The relations (4.7.41) and
(4.7.42) are continuous analogs of (4.6.33) and (4.6.34).
A kernel[K(λ, λ′)] is a function de/g192ned for almost allλ, λ′∈ /Lambda1such
that K(λ, λ′) is a bounded operator from Hλ,t o Hλ. An operator K in
H is determined by the kernel[K(λ, λ′)] if for any ψ∈ H
Kψ=
[∫
/Lambda1
K(λ, λ′)ψλ′dλ′
]
. (4.7.44)
This correspondence can be given a strict mathematical sense if K is,
say, Hilbert-Schmidt (cf. Section 2.7); for a Hermitean Hilbert-Schmidt
operator K = ∑κj|ψ j)(ψ j| the kernel is K(λ, λ′)= ∑κj|ψ j
λ )λλ′(ψ j
λ′|
where ψ j
λ is the component ofψ j in Hλ. Thus K j(λ, λ′)=| ψ j
λ )λλ′·(ψ j
λ′|
is an operator from Hλ′to Hλ acting according to the formula
K j(λ, λ′)ψλ′= ψ j
λ (ψ j
λ′|ψλ′)λ′.
However we shall use the correspondence between the kernels and the
operators formally in a broader context; in particular the unit operator
in
H will be described by the kernel [δ(λ− λ′)Iλ] where Iλ is the unit
operator in Hλ.
The kernel is called positive de/g192niteif
∫∫
(ψλ|K(λ, λ′)ψλ′)λdλ dλ′≥ 0; ψ=[ ψλ]. (4.7.45)
This corresponds to positivity of the operator determined by (4.7.44).
Substituting f (λ)ψ
λ in place of ψλ, where f is an arbitrary scalar func-
tion we get that (4.7.45) holds if and only if for any ψ =[ ψλ] the scalar
kernel[(ψλ|K(λ, λ′)ψλ′)λ] is positive de/g192nite. Then by the Cauchy in-
equality
|(ψλ|K(λ, λ′)ψλ′)λ|2 ≤ (ψλ|K(λ, λ)ψλ)λ(ψλ′|K(λ′,λ′)ψλ′)λ′(4.7.46)
for almost all λ, λ′∈ /Lambda1,i fK(λ, λ) is properly de/g192ned (cf.the remark
before (2.7.83)).

164 Alexander Holevo
The general form of a measurement covariant with respect to the rep-
resentation (4.7.40) is given by the continuous analog of Theorem 4.6.1:
M(B)=
[
K(λ, λ′)
∫
B
ei(λ′−λ)θ dθ
2π
]
; B∈ A (R), (4.7.47)
where[K(λ, λ′)] is a positive de/g192nite kernel satisfying K(λ, λ)= Iλ.I t
is easy to check at the formal level that (4.7.47) is a resolution of identity:
M(dθ)≥ 0 due to the positive de/g192niteness of the kernel
[K(λ, λ′) exp i(λ′− λ)θ]
and ∫
M(dθ)=[ δ(λ− λ′)Iλ]= I.
Assume now that dim Hλ is the same for almost all λ ∈ /Lambda1. Let
{U(λ, λ′)} be a consistent family of isometric maps ofHλ′onto Hλ. Then
[U(λ, λ′)] is a kernel determining by (4.7.47) a covariant measurement.
If we agree that{U(λ, λ′)} identi/g192es the spacesHλ we obtain the “canon-
ical” covariant measurement
M(dθ)=[ Iλei(λ′−λ)θ] dθ
2π .
Let S =| ψ)(ψ| be a pure state with ψ =[ ψλ]. Then denoting by
/Phi1ψ(λ) =
∫∞
−∞ exp(iλθ)(ψ|M(dθ)ψ) the characteristic function of the
measurement probability distribution with respect to the state S we get
using (4.7.47)
/Phi1ψ(λ)=
∫
(ψμ|K(μ, μ− λ)ψμ−λ)dμ. (4.7.48)
The integral converges, since by (4.7.46) and the conditionK(λ, λ)= Iλ
|(ψμ|K(μ, μ− λ)ψμ−λ)|≤∥ψμ∥μ∥ψμ−λ∥μ−λ, (4.7.49)
and both functions in the right-hand side are square-integrable. If we
suppose additionally that
∫
/Lambda1
∥ψλ∥λdλ<∞, (4.7.50)
then the characteristic function is integrable by (4.7.49) and the measure-
ment probability distribution has the continuous density
p
ψ(θ)≡ 1
2π
∫
e−iθλ /Phi1ψ(λ)dλ
= 1
2π
∫∫
(ψλ|K(λ, λ′)ψλ′)λei(λ′−λ)θ dλ dλ′.

165 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
This agrees with the expression for M(dθ)/dθ which follows formally
from (4.7.47).
We now turn to the covariant estimation problem for the shift parame-
ter θ in the family
Sθ = e−iθ A Seiθ A; θ∈ R,
where S =| ψ)(ψ| is a pure state. Since the symmetry group is non-
compact we cannot apply Theorem 4.3.1. Moreover since the “uniform
distribution” dθ is in/g192nite there is no covariant Bayes formulation. One
can prove the noncompact analog of Theorem 4.3.1 for the minimax ap-
proach, but we shall instead proceed with minimizing the mean deviation
Rθ{M}=
∫∞
−∞
W(ˆθ− θ)μθ (dˆθ)
restricting essentially to covariant measurements. Due to covariance this
quantity does not depend on θ and we have to minimize
R0{M}=
∫∞
−∞
W(θ)μ0(dθ).
Similarly to Theorem 4.4.1 we assume that the deviation function is a
real continuous negatively de/g192nite function,i.e.,
W(θ)=−
∫
e
iθλ ˜W(dλ),
where ˜W(dλ) is an even /g192nite measure onR. An example is given by
W(θ − ˆθ) =− exp[−(θ − ˆθ)2]. Then for the covariant measurement
(4.7.47)
R0{M}=−
∫
/Phi1ψ(λ)˜W(dλ).
By the inequality (4.7.49)
Re /Phi1ψ(λ)≤ /Phi1∗(λ)≡
∫
∥ψμ∥μ∥ψμ−λ∥μ−λdμ,
so that
R0{M}≥−
∫∫
∥ψμ∥μ∥ψμ−λ∥μ−λdμ˜W(dλ)= R0{M0},
where
M0(dθ)=
[|ψλ)λλ′(ψλ′|
∥ψλ∥λ ·∥ψλ′∥λ′
ei(λ′−λ)θ
]dθ
2π . (4.7.51)

166 Alexander Holevo
As in Section 4.6 the optimal operator-valued measure M0(dθ) is not, in
general, a resolution of identity since
∫
M0(dθ)≡ E0 is equal to the unit
operator if and only if dim Hλ ≡ 1 for almost all λ∈ /Lambda1. However it can
be extended to a resolution of identity by adding an arbitrary resolution
of identity in the orthogonal complement to the subspace
H0 = E0(H ):
M∗(dθ)= M0(dθ)⊕ M1(dθ). (4.7.52)
The term M1(dθ) has no in/g193uence on the measurement statistics with re-
spect to the states Sθ , which is determined by the probability distributions
μθ (dˆθ)=
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
/Lambda1
∥ψλ∥λeiλ(ˆθ−θ) dλ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2 dˆθ
2π ,
following from (4.7.51). However, it may affect the covariance prop-
erty of the measurement (4.7.52). In any case M
∗(dθ) is “essentially
covariant”, i.e., satis/g192es the covariance condition on the subspaceH0,o n
which the family{Sθ} is concentrated. Thus, essentially,the measurement
(4.7.52) is optimal for any deviation function of the required form.
The same is true for the maximum-likelihood approach. Assume that
the basis state S=| ψ)(ψ| satis/g192es (4.7.50) so that the densitypψ(dˆθ) is
continuous. Then the formal Bayes functional with the deviation function
W(θ)=− δ(θ) and the prior distribution π(dθ)= dθ reduces to
−pψ(0)=−
∫
/Phi1ψ(λ)dλ
=−
∫∫
(ψλ|K(λ, λ′)ψλ′)λdλ dλ′.
It has to be minimized over positive de/g192nite kernels[K(λ,λ′)] satisfying
K(λ,λ)= Iλ. The solution of this problem is apparently given by the
same formulas (4.7.51) and (4.7.52)).
Consider now the case of quadratic deviation
W(ˆθ− θ)= (ˆθ− θ)2,
which corresponds to the estimation problem formulated in Section 3.2.
It is natural to restrict to measurements for which
R0{M}=
∫
θ2μS(dθ)
is /g192nite. As is known from a course of probability the /g192niteness of the
second moment is equivalent to the existence of the second derivative of
the characteristic function at zero point, and
∫
θ
2μS(dθ)=− d2
dλ2 /Phi1ψ(λ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
λ=0
=− d2
dλ2 Re /Phi1ψ(λ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
λ=0
.

167 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Assume that the basic state satis/g192es
∫
|d/dλ∥ψλ∥λ|2dλ<∞ and more-
over ψλ = 0 at the ends of the interval /Lambda1(if the interval extends to
in/g192nity this is automatically satis/g192ed). Then the characteristic function
/Phi1
∗
ψ
(λ) for the measurement (4.7.52) is twice differentiable at zero point
with
d2
dλ2 /Phi1∗
ψ
(λ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
λ=0
= d2
dλ2
∫
/Lambda1
∥ψμ∥μ∥ψμ−λ∥μ−λdμ
=−
∫
/Lambda1
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dλ∥ψλ∥λ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dλ,
where we have used the assumed properties of [ψλ]. Consider the func-
tions Re/Phi1ψ(λ) and /Phi1∗
ψ
(λ). They satisfy Re/Phi1ψ(λ)≤/Phi1∗
ψ
(λ),R e/Phi1ψ(0)=
/Phi1∗
ψ
(0) and are twice differentiable at λ= 0. It follows that
(d2/dλ2)/Phi1∗
ψ
(0)≥ (d2/dλ2) Re /Phi1ψ(0)
so that R0{M}≥ R0{M∗}. Thus the formulas (4.7.51) and (4.7.52) de-
termine the measurement which is optimal in the sense of mean-square
deviation.
A measurement M ={ M(dθ)} with /g192nite second moment is anun-
biased measurement of the parameter θ if E
θ{M}=θ , θ ∈ R, where
the subscript θ refers to the state Sθ . As in Section 3.2 any covariant
measurement satis/g192esEθ{M}= E0{M}+θ and so is unbiased up to a
constant. Assuming that E0{M}=0w eh a v e Dθ{M}= R0{M}, θ ∈ R.
We therefore have obtaineda bound for the variance of a covariant mea-
surement
D{M}≥ D∗(θ)≡
∫
/Lambda1
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dλ∥ψλ∥λ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dλ (4.7.53)
which is achieved on the optimal measurement determined by (4.7.51)
and (4.7.52). The quantity D
∗(θ) is the intrinsic minimal uncertainty
of the shift parameter θ ∈ R in the pure state S =| ψ)(ψ|. This is
analogical to the quantity /Delta1∗(ϕ) of (4.5.28) giving the uncertainty of an
angular parameter. Observing that
∫
/Lambda1
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dλ∥ψλ∥λ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
dλ≥ 1
4
[∫
/Lambda1
(λ− c)2∥ψλ∥2
λ
dλ
]−1
,
(this is just the Heisenberg uncertainty relation (3.3.29) in the momentum
representation for the state function ψ(λ) =∥ψ
λ∥λ, λ∈ /Lambda1and ψ(λ) =
0, λ¯∈/Lambda1), we obtain the uncertainty relation
D∗(θ)· D(A)≥ 1
4,

168 Alexander Holevo
which agrees with (3.2.12). A more general result will be established
rigorously in Section 6.3.
As a /g192rst application we consider the covariant measurement of the
coordinate parameter x in the family
S
x = e−ixP|ψ)(ψ|eixP; x∈ R.
The role of A is played by momentum operator P (we take ℏ= 1), which
is diagonal in the momentum representation
ψ=[ ˜ψ(η)], ∥ψ∥2 =
∫∞
−∞
|˜ψ(η)|2dη;
Pψ=[ η˜ψ(η)].
The representation space H = L 2(R) is the direct orthogonal integral
of the one-dimensional spaces Hη, η ∈ /Lambda1≡ R. The optimal covariant
measurement is given by the kernel
M∗(dx)=[ γη¯γη′ei(η′−η)x] dx
2π , (4.7.54)
which is the continuous analog of (4.4.22). Here γη = ˜ψ(η)/|˜ψ(η)|.I f
arg ˜ψ(η)= const. for almost all η,w eg e t
M∗(dx)=[ ei(η′−η)x] dx
2π , (4.7.55)
which is just a symbolic form of (2.4.45) to within the notations for the
arguments. Thus the canonical measurement (4.7.55) is the spectral mea-
sure of the self-adjoint operator i d /dη representing the canonical coor-
dinate observable Q in the momentum representation. Otherwise the op-
timal covariant measurement is given by (4.7.54) which is the spectral
measure of the self-adjoint operator γ
ηi(d/dη)¯γη. This gives the covari-
ant estimate of coordinate x in the family{Sx} with the minimal variance
D∗(x)=
∫∞
−∞
⎫ d
dη|˜ψ(η)|
⎬2
dη.
The measurements (4.7.54) corresponding to differentψ are obtained one
from another by “gauge” transformations˜ψ(η)→ γη ˜ψ(η) with|γη|≡1.
The second example is the covariant measurements of time parameter
t in the family
St = e−itE|ψ)(ψ|eitE , t∈ R.

169 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
We assume that the energy operator E has purely Lebesgue spectrum oc-
cupying /Lambda1= (0,∞). Namely the Hilbert space is the direct orthogonal
integral
H=
∫∞
0
⨁
Hϵdϵ,
and E acts as multiplication by ϵ: Eψ =[ ϵψϵ] where ψϵ is the compo-
nent of ψ in Hϵ. The optimal covariant time measurement is given by
the formula
M∗(dt)=
[|ψϵ)ϵ· ϵ′(ψϵ′|
∥ψϵ∥ϵ·∥ψϵ′∥ϵ′
ei(ϵ′−ϵ)t
]dt
2π ⊕ M1(dt). (4.7.56)
If H = L 2
K(0,∞) as in Section 3.8, then we can take Hϵ= K, ϵ∈
(0,∞). This gives a special way of identi/g192cation ofHϵ, ϵ∈ (0,∞) to
which corresponds the canonical measurement
M(dt)=[ ei(ϵ′−ϵ)t] dt
2π ,
where we have omitted the unit operator in K from the squared brackets.
This is just a symbolic form of the general relation analogous to (3.8.74),
representing the (nonorthogonal) spectral measure of the canonical time
observable T = id /d
ϵ. On the other hand, the /g192rst, essential, term in the
optimal time measurement (4.7.56) is the spectral measure of the operator
|ψϵ)ϵ
∥ψϵ∥ϵ
i d
dϵ
ϵ(ψϵ|
∥ψϵ∥ϵ
differing from T by the factors involving the basic state.
4.8. Thecaseofirreduciblerepresentation
We now pass to quantum estimation problems with multidimensional pa-
rameter θ. Representations of symmetry groups in these problems will
be irreducible due to either noncommutativity of the group or essential
projectivity of the representation. On the other hand, the irreducibility
considerably simpli/g192es the description of the covariant measurements.
Let g → V
g be an irreducible representation of the group G in the
Hilbert space H. Assume /g192rst thatG is compact; then by a general the-
orem of the representation theory d = dim H <∞. For an irreducible
representation the following orthogonality relations hold
∫
(ψ1|Vgϕ1)(ϕ2|V∗
g ψ2)μ(dg)= c(ϕ2|ϕ1)(ψ1|ψ2), (4.8.57)

170 Alexander Holevo
where the factor c, depending on the normalization of the invariant mea-
sure μ, is equal to d−1 if μ(G)= 1.
Since any operator T in a /g192nite-dimensional space is the /g192nite-rank
operator T = ∑
i |ϕi
1)(ϕi
2|, (4.8.57) and (2.1.17) imply
∫
(ψ1|Vg TV∗
g ψ2)μ(dg)= d−1(ψ1|ψ2) Tr T,ψ j ∈ H,
or ∫
Vg TV∗
g μ(dg)= d−1 Tr T· I. (4.8.58)
In particular, if S is a density operator, then
∫
Vg SV∗
g μ(dg)= d−1 I. (4.8.59)
Taking trace here we get the identity Tr Vg SV∗
g ≡ Tr S= 1, which con-
/g192rms the correctness of the choicec= d−1.I fw et a k ec= 1 this would
correspond to normalization
μ(G)= dim H= d. (4.8.60)
Turning to Theorem 4.2.3 which gives a description of covariant mea-
surements we see that for an irreducible representation the condition
(4.2.4) due to (4.8.59) reduces to Tr P
0 = d; together with positivity
of P0 this means that S0 = d−1 P0 is a density operator. We thus obtain:
Proposition4.8.1. Let g → Vg be an irreducible representation of a
compact group G of transformations of the set /Theta1. The relation
M(dθ)= d· Vg S0V∗
g ν(dθ) (θ = gθ0), (4.8.61)
establishes the one-to-one af/g192ne correspondence between the covariant
measurements M (dθ) and the density operators S
0, commuting with
{Vg; g∈ G0}.
In particular, if G0 is trivial, then S0 may be an arbitrary density oper-
ator and the extreme points of the set of covariant measurements corre-
spond precisely to pure states S
0 =| ψ0)(ψ0|:
M(dθ)= d· Vg|ψ0)(ψ0|V∗
g ν(dθ).
Consider now the covariant estimation problemfor the family of states
(4.3.10). According to Section 4.3 it reduces to solving the problem
(4.3.15) where ˆW
0 is the operator of posterior deviation expressed

171 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
through the data of the estimation problem by the formula (4.3.14). This
has a simple solution in the irreducible case. The set P consists now of
the operators P
0 commuting with{Vg; g∈ G0} and satisfying
P0 ≥ 0, Tr P0 = d.
Let ˆwmin be the least eigenvalue of ˆW0,a n dˆEmin be the projection onto
the corresponding invariant subspace. Then ˆW0 ≥ˆwmin· I whence
Tr ˆW0 P0 ≥ˆwmin Tr P0 =ˆwmind.
The equality is achieved if
P0 = ˆEmin
d
dmin
, (4.8.62)
where dmin is the dimensionality of the invariant subspace. Since ˆW0
commutes with {Vg; g ∈ G0}, so does ˆEmin and the operator (4.8.62)
satis/g192es all the required conditions. We thus get
Proposition4.8.2. Let g → V
g be an irreducible representation of a
compact group G acting on the set /Theta1. The optimal covariant measure-
ment of the parameter θ is given by the relation
M∗(dθ)= d
dmin
VgˆEminV∗
g v(dθ) (θ = gθ0),
where ˆEmin is the projection onto the invariant subspace of the opera-
tor of posterior deviation (4.3.14), corresponding to the least eigenvalue
ˆwmin, and dmin is the dimensionality of the subspace. The minimal mean
deviation is equal to ˆwmind.
An analogous result holds for the maximum-likelihood approach: the
covariant maximum-likelihood measurement of the parameter θ in the
family{Sθ} is
M(dθ)= d
dmax
Vg EmaxV∗
g ν(dθ) (θ = gθ0),
where Emax is the projection onto the invariant subspace corresponding
to the greatest eigenvalue of the density operator S = Sθ0 , dmax is its
dimensionality.
These results are suf/g192cient for the concrete estimation problems to be
considered in the following two paragraphs. We conclude this section

172 Alexander Holevo
with a discussion of non-compact groups which has an application to
joint measurements of coordinate and velocity considered in Section 3.6.
The orthogonality relations (4.8.57) hold for irreducible representa-
tions of an arbitrary parametric group under the condition of square-in-
tegrability of the matrix elements (ψ
1|Vgψ2), g ∈ G, for all ψj ∈ H.
Normalizing μ in such a way that c= 1 we obtain
∫
Vg SV∗
g μ(dg)= I (4.8.63)
for an arbitrary density operator S, where the integral converges weakly.
Using this fact we shall generalize Proposition 4.8.1. We now assume
that the invariant measures μ and ν are normalized so that (4.8.63) holds
(for a compact group this corresponds to (4.8.60)).
Theorem4.8.3. The relation
M(B)=
∫
B
Vg S0V∗
g ν(dθ), B∈ A (/Theta1) (θ= gθ0), (4.8.64)
establishes the one-to-one af/g192ne correspondence between the measure-
ments{M(B)} covariant with respect to an irreducible square-integrable
representation g→ V
g of the group G acting on the set/Theta1and the density
operators S0 commuting with{Vg; g ∈ G0}. The integral is understood
in the sense of weak convergence.2
We shall /g192rst prove two lemmas involving properties of trace-class op-
erators from Section 2.7.
Lemma4.8.4. Let M be a Hermitean positive operator and {T
n} be
a monotonely non-decreasing sequence of Hermitean operators weakly
converging to the unit operator. Then Tr T
n M ↑ Tr M; in particular
supn Tr Tn M <∞ implies that M is a trace-class operator.
Proof. Let{ej} be a basis in H, then
Tr Tn M= Tr
√
MTn
√
M=
∑
j
(
√
Me j|Tn
√
Me j ).
By the properties of{Tn} we have
(
√
Me j|Tn
√
Me j )↑ (
√
Me j|
√
Me j)= (ej|Me j).
2 Moreover if ν( B)<∞, then this converges as the Bochner’s integral of a function with values in
the Banach space of trace-class operators, see Dunford and Schwartz [31].

173 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
By the monotone convergence theorem
∑
j
(
√
Me j|Tn
√
Me j)↑
∑
j
(ej|Me j)= Tr M.
Lemma4.8.5. Let{M(B)}be a covariant measurement.ThenTrM(B)=
ν( B). In particular if ν( B)<∞, then M (B) is trace-class.
Proof. Let{Bn} be a non-decreasing sequence of compact subsets, cov-
ering /Theta1. Consider
Tn =
∫
Bn
Vg SV∗
g μ(dg), (4.8.65)
where S is a density operator. By positivity of the integrand Tn ≥ 0 and
Tr Tn ≤
∫
Bn
Tr Vg SV∗
g μ(dg)= μ(Bn)<∞
so that Tn is trace-class. Since Bn ⊆ Bn+1 we have Tn ≤ Tn+1. Moreover
Tn → I weakly by (4.8.63). The sequence {Tn} satis/g192es Lemma 4.8.4,
so that Tr M(B)= limn Tr Tn M(B). But according to (4.2.3)
lim
n
Tr Tn M(B)= lim
n
∫
Bn
Tr Vg SV∗
g M(B)μ(dg)= ν( B),
which proves the lemma.
Proof of Theorem 4.8.3. Let S0 be a density operator satisfying the con-
ditions of the theorem. De/g192ningM(B) by the weakly converging integral
(4.8.64) we get a resolution of identity. Indeed M(B)≥ 0 since the inte-
grand is positive. The weakσ -additivity is a property of the integral. The
normalization M(/Theta1)= I follows from (4.8.63) and the covariance is a
straightforward calculation.
Conversely, let{M(B)} be a covariant measurement. Then by Lemma
4.8.5 it satis/g192es the condition of Proposition 4.2.2, which is established
as in the proof of Theorem 4.2.3. Therefore
M(B)=
∫
B
P(θ)ν(dθ),
where P(θ) isanoperator-valueddensity, positive and satisfying∥P(θ)∥≤
1 for ν-almost all θ. As in Theorem 4.2.3 covariance implies P(θ) =
Vg P(θ0)V∗
g , θ= gθ0, for the proper de/g192nition of the density. By (4.8.63)
P(θ0) must have the unit trace, i.e., it must be a density operator. The
theorem is proved.

174 Alexander Holevo
As an example consider the group G of shifts (ξ, η)→ (ξ+ x,η+ v)
of the plane /Theta1= R2. The stationary subgroup G0 is trivial in this case. It
follows from the uniqueness theorem of Section 3.4 that any (continuous)
irreducible projective unitary representation (x,v) → W
x,v of the group
is unitary equivalent to the Schr¨odinger representation with μ̸=0. Then
by Proposition 3.5.1 it is square-integrable; the orthogonality relations
hold with c = 1 corresponding to the invariant measure μ dx dv/2π.
Theorem 4.8.3 implies the any measurement M (dx dv), covariant with
respect to the representation(x,v) → W
x,v has the form
M(dx dv)= Wx,v S0W∗
x,v
μ dx dv
2π .
Thus (3.6.52) describes precisely the extreme points of the convex set of
covariant measurements.
Turning to the optimality question we note that
R{M}= gx Dx{M}+
gv Dv{M} is an af/g192ne functional of a measurementM, which is /g192nite ifM
has /g192nite second moments; by a general theorem of convex analysis (see
comments to this chapter) it achieves its minimum at an extreme point of
the convex set of covariant measurements M(dx dv) having /g192nite second
moments. Together with (3.6.58) this leads to
Proposition4.8.6. The canonical measurement (3.6.59) is the optimal
covariant joint measurement of coordinate and velocity, minimizing the
measure of accuracy
R{M}.
4.9. Estimationofpurestate
Let H be a Hilbert space of /g192nite dimensionalityn. Denote by /Theta1the
unit sphere in H ; the elements of /Theta1are the vectors|θ) ∈ H satisfying
(θ|θ) = 1. The set /Theta1can be parametrized as follows: let {ej} be a basis
in H, then
|θ)=
n∑
j=1
θj|ej ),
where θj = (ej|θ); j= 1,...,n , are complex numbers satisfying
n∑
j=1
|θj|2 =
n∑
j=1
[(Re θj )2+ (Im θj )2]=1. (4.9.66)
To anyθ∈ /Theta1corresponds a pure state
Sθ =| θ)(θ|. (4.9.67)

175 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The parametrization of pure states is not one-to-one, since vectors differ-
ing by a complex factor of unit modulus describe the same pure state, but
this is not important here.
Assume that a quantum object described by the Hilbert space
H is
prepared in a pure state of which “nothing is known” and the problem is to
estimate the state as accurately as possible using measurements admitted
by quantum theory. In other words we need to estimate the parameter θ
in the family (4.9.67).
Consider the group G of all unitary operators U in
H. Since the unit
vector is transformed by U into a unit vector, this is a compact group of
transformations of the set /Theta1. The normalized invariant measureν(dθ)
on /Theta1is up to a factor the Euclidean area on the real 2n-dimensional unit
sphere (4.9.66). Considering the action of the unitary operators in H as
the representation of G we see that the family (4.9.67) is covariant
USθ U∗ =| Uθ)(Uθ|= SUθ.
The representation U → U is apparently irreducible.
Let us describe measurements, covariant with respect to this repre-
sentation. Fix θ0 = e1, and consider the stationary subgroup G0 of θ0.
Clearly it consists of unitary operators of the form
U0 =
[λ 0
0 U′
0
]
,
where|λ|=1 and U′
0 is a unitary operator in the orthogonal complement
to|θ0). A Hermitean operator S0 commutes with all U0 ∈ G0 if and only
if
S0 = α|θ0)(θ0|+β I,
where α, β are real, i.e.,
S0 =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
α+ β 0
β
β
0 ...
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦ .
If S
0 is a density operator: S0 ≥ 0 and Tr S0 = 1, then α+ β≥ 0, β≥ 0
and nβ+ α= 1, i.e.,
β= (1− α)/n;− (n− 1)−1 ≤ α≤ 1.
By Proposition 4.8.1 any covariant measurement of parameter θ has the
form
M(dθ)= U[αn|θ0)(θ0|+(1 − α)I]U∗ν(dθ), (θ = Uθ0),

176 Alexander Holevo
where α is a real number running over the segment−(n− 1)−1 ≤ α≤ 1.
It follows that the set of covariant measurements, as a convex set, is a
segment. An extreme point of this set corresponding to α= 1i s
M
∗(dθ)= nU|θ0)(θ0|U∗ν(dθ)= n|θ)(θ|ν(dθ). (4.9.68)
This is apparently the maximum-likelihood measurement for the family
(4.9.67). Another important measurement corresponding to α= 0i s
M
∗(dθ)= I· ν(dθ).
This resolution of identity describes simple guessing, when the result of
measurement is chosen at random with respect to the uniform distribution
ν(dθ).
The simplest invariant deviation function on/Theta1is
δ= 1−| (
θ|ˆθ)|2;
we shall consider more general deviation functions
Wθ(ˆθ)= W(δ). (4.9.69)
Proposition4.9.1. The covariant measurement (4.9.68) is optimal for a
deviation function of the form (4.9.69) where W(·) is an arbitrary mono-
tonely nondecreasing function, which is not identically constant.
Proof. Since the mean deviation is an af/g192ne functional of measurement
it is suf/g192cient to show that
R{M∗} < R{M∗},
i.e., that ∫
Wθ0(θ)n|(θ0|θ)|2ν(dθ) <
∫
Wθ0 (θ)ν(dθ).
Denoting r=| (θ0|θ)| rewrite it in the form
n
∫
W(1− r2)r2ν(dθ) <
∫
W(1− r2)ν(dθ).
By Lemma 4.9.2 proven below this is equivalent to
n
∫1
0
W(1− r2)r2d(1− r2)n−1 >
∫1
0
W(1− r2)d(1− r2)n−1,

177 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
or
∫1
0
W(1− r2)[(n− 1)(1− r2)n−2− n(1− r2)n−1]dr2 < 0.
Passing to the new variable δ= 1− r2 we have
∫1
0
W(δ)d(δn−1− δn)<0.
Integrating by parts we obtain the relation
∫1
0
(δn−1− δn)dW(δ) > 0,
which apparently holds for a nonconstant nondecreasing W(·), since
δn−1− δn > 0 for 0 <δ<1.
To demonstrate the gain due to the optimal measurement we give
the values of mean deviation in case of the simplest deviation function
W(δ)= δ;
R{M∗}=n
∫1
0
δ(1− δ)dδn−1 = n− 1
n+ 1,
R{M∗}=
∫1
0
δ dδn−1 = n− 1
n .
The ratio R{M∗}/R{M∗}=n /(n+ 1) is minimal and equal to 2
3 for the
two-dimensional Hilbert space and increases to 1 as n→∞ . Thus in an
in/g192nite-dimensional Hilbert space there is no better may to estimate the
unknown pure state than simple guessing.
Lemma4.9.2. For any function F(r)
∫
/Theta1
F(|θ0|θ)|)ν(dθ) =−
∫1
0
F(r)d(1− r2)n−1.
Proof. Choose a basis{ej} such that e1 = θ0 and denote (ej|θ) = αj +
iβj . Then
/Theta1=
{
αj ,β j :
n∑
j=1
(α2
j + β2
j )= 1
}
and r=
√
α2
1 + β2
1 . We shall prove the lemma if we prove that
∫
α2
1+β2
1≥ρ2
ν(dθ)= (1− ρ2)n−1. (4.9.70)

178 Alexander Holevo
Consider the auxiliary integral
Fm(ρ, R)=
∫
···
∫
x2
1+x2
2≥ρ2
x2
1+···+x2
m≤R2
dx1···d xm.
The area of the unit sphere is then (∂ Fn(0, R)/∂ R)|R=1; therefore the
normalized area of the /g192gure cut of the unit sphere by the inequalityx2
1+
x2
2 ≥ ρ2 is given by the expression
∂ Fm(ρ, R)
∂ R
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
R=1
: ∂ Fm(0, R)
∂ R
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
R=1
.
But this normalized area is the left-hand side of (4.9.70) if m= 2n.W e
have
Fm(ρ, R)=
∫
···
∫{∫∫
ρ2≤x2
1+x2
2≤R2−x2
3−···−x2m
dx1 dx2
}
dx3···d xm
=
∫
···
∫
π( R2− ρ2− x2
3 −···− x2
m)dx3···d xm,
the integration being performed over the domain where the integrand is
nonnegative, i.e., x
2
3+···+ x2
m ≤ R2−ρ2. Denoting by Sn−2(r)= crm−3
the area of the sphere x2
3 +···+ x2
m = r2,w eh a v e
Fm(ρ, R)= cπ
∫√
R2−ρ2
0
(R2− ρ2− r2)Sm−2(r)dr= c1(R2− ρ2)n/2,
whence (∂/∂ R)Fm(ρ, R)|R=1 = c2(1− ρ2)(m−2)/2, so that
∂ F2n(ρ, R)
∂ R
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
R=1
: ∂ F2n(0, R)
∂ R
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
R=1
= (1− ρ2)n−1,
and (4.9.70) is proved.
4.10. Measuringparametersoforientation
Here we shall consider the estimation of orientation of a quantum object
by measurements involving only spin degrees of freedom. We /g192rst as-
sume the prepared basic state S to be invariant under rotations about the
given symmetry axis n
0:
S=
j∑
m=− j
sm|m)(m|,

179 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
where j is the spin of the object, {|m)} are the eigenvectors of the spin
angular momentum J0 corresponding to the axis n0 (see Section 3.11).
If the preparing apparatus is then rotated so that the symmetry axis is
transformed into n= gn
0, where g is the element of the rotation group,
the new state will be Sn = Vg SV∗
g , where g → Vg is the irreducible
projective unitary representation of the rotation group in the (2 j+ 1)-
dimensional Hilbert space spanned by{|m)}.
We thus have the covariant family of quantum states
Sn = Vg SV∗
g (n= gn0), n∈ S2,
where S2 is the unit sphere in R3.
Orientation of the object is now described by the unit vectorn pointing
in the direction of the symmetry axis. Assume that the actual direction
n is unknown and the problem is to estimate it basing on quantum mea-
surement M(dn).
We shall adopt the deviation function
W
n(ˆn)=| n−ˆn|2 = 2(1− n·ˆn), (4.10.71)
which is apparently invariant. As the prior distribution in the Bayes’
approach we shall take the normalized invariant measure ν(dn) on S
2.
According to Proposition 4.8.1 any covariant measurement of the di-
rection n is given by the formula
M(dn)= (2 j+ 1)Vg S0V∗
g ν(dn)( n= gn0),
where S0 is a density operator commuting with {Vg; g ∈ G0}. Since
G0 consists of rotations about the axis n0, this is equivalent for S0 to
have the diagonal form in the basis {|m)}. To /g192nd the optimal covariant
measurement we need to calculate the operator of posterior deviation
ˆW0 = 2
∫
G
(1− n0· gn0)V∗
g SVgμ(dg),
where μ(dg) is the normalized invariant measure on the rotation group.
It is shown at the end of this section that
ˆW0 = 2
2 j+ 1
[
I− Tr SJ0
j( j+ 1) J0
]
. (4.10.72)
According to Proposition 4.8.2 we need to know the least eigenvalue
and the corresponding eigenvector of (4.10.72). Since J
0 has the known
spectral representation (3.11.116) we /g192nd the eigenvalueˆwmin = 2(1−

180 Alexander Holevo
|¯J0|( j+ 1)−1), where ¯J0 = Tr SJ0 and the corresponding eigenvector| j)
if ¯J0 > 0o r|− j) if ¯J0 < 0.
Denoting|m, n) ≡ Vg|m), where n = gn0, we see from Proposition
4.8.2 that theoptimal covariant measurement of direction of the symmetry
axis n is
M∗(dn)= (2 j+ 1)Vg|± j)(± j|V∗
g ν(dn)
= (2 j+ 1)|± j; n)(± j; n|ν(dn)( n= gn0),
where the sign± corresponds to the sign of ¯J0. The minimal mean devi-
ation is equal to ˆwmin = 2(1−| ¯J0|( j+ 1)−1). Note that simple guessing
which is described by the resolution of identityM∗(dn)= I·ν(dn) gives
the mean deviation R{M∗}=Tr ˆW0 = 2 so that
R{M∗}
R{M∗}= 1− |¯J0|
j+ 1.
This shows that the gain due to the optimal measurement increases with
the value of ratio|¯J
0|( j+ 1)−1 and vanishes if ¯J0 = 0.
According to Section 4.3 the measurement M∗(dn) is optimal in both
Bayes and minimax senses. The maximum-likelihood approach would
give, in general, a different result. As follows from the remark after
Proposition 4.8.2 the covariant maximum-likelihood measurement coin-
cides with M
∗(dn) only if the vector |± j) corresponds to the greatest
eigenvalue of the basic density operator S.
Consider now the problem of estimation of orientation without assum-
ing rotational symmetry of the basic state S. The orientation is then
described by /g192xing a Cartesian frameθ ={ n1, n2, n3} in R3 bound to
the preparing apparatus. Let θ0 ={ n0
1
, n0
2
, n0
3
} be a /g192xed basic frame.
Rotation g is uniquely de/g192ned by the transformed frameθ = gθ0 ≡
{gn0
1
, gn0
2
, gn0
3
}. Thus the set /Theta1of all frames can be identi/g192ed with the
rotation group G, and the relevant covariant family of states in Sθ =
Vg SV∗
g , θ= gθ0, where g runs over the rotation group.
The deviation of the frame ˆθ ={ˆn1,ˆn2,ˆn3} from the frame θ will be
taken in the form
Wθ (ˆθ)=
3∑
i=1
|ni −ˆni|2 = 2
3∑
i=1
(1− ni ·ˆni). (4.10.73)
The corresponding operator of posterior deviation
ˆW0 = 2
3∑
i=1
∫
[1− n0
i · gn0
i]V∗
g SVgμ(dg)

181 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
using (4.10.72) is equal to
ˆW0= 2
2 j+1
3∑
i=1
[
I−
¯Ji
j( j+1) Ji
]
= 2
2 j+ 1
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
3−



√
3∑
i=1
¯J2
i
j( j+ 1)
3∑
i=1
αi Ji
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
,
where J
i is the spin angular momentum corresponding to the axis n0
i ,
¯Ji = Tr SJi and αi = ¯Ji(∑
i ¯J2
i )−1/2. The operator ∑
i αi Ji repre-
sents spin angular momentum corresponding to the axis ¯n = α1n0
1
+
α2n0
2
+ α3n0
3
. It follows from Section 3.11 that its maximal eigenvalue
is equal to j; the corresponding eigenvector is apparently | j;¯n). Then
from Proposition 4.8.2 the optimal covariant measurement of orientation
θ={ n1, n2, n3} is given by
M∗(dθ)= (2 j+ 1)Vg| j;¯n)(¯n; j|V∗
g ν(dθ) (θ = gθ0).
The minimal mean deviation is equal to 2[3−
√∑
i ¯J2
i ( j+ 1)−1], so that
the gain due to the optimal measurement is
R{M∗}
R{M∗}= 1− 1
3



√
3∑
i=1
¯J2
i
j+ 1 ,
and has the same nature as in the previous problem.
To prove (4.10.72) we calculate the matrix elements ofˆW0 in the basis
{|m)}. For this we need the matrix elements of the representation opera-
tors{Vg}. Let 0≤ θ≤ π,0 ≤ ψ< 2π,0 ≤ ϕ< 2π be the Euler angles
describing the rotation g. Then
μ(dg)= (8π2)−1d(cos θ)dψ dϕ.
Moreover
(n|Vg|m)= e−imψ−inϕ P j
mn (cos θ),
P j
mn (t)= K(1− t)α/2(1+ t)β/2 Pαβ
s (t),
where Pαβ
s are the Jacobi polynomials, α =| n− m|, β =| n+ m|,
s= j− 1
2(α+β) (see Comments). Integrating by ϕ and ψ and using the

182 Alexander Holevo
relation 1− n0· gn0 = 1− cos θ we get
(m|ˆW0|m′)= δmm′
j∑
n=− j
(n|S|n)
∫1
−1
(1− t)|P j
mn(t)|2dt.
It remains to calculate
∫1
−1
(1−t)|P j
mn (t)|2dt= K 2
∫1
−1
(1−t)α+1(1+t)β|Pαβ
s (t)|2dt, (4.10.74)
where the constant K is de/g192ned by the normalization
K 2·
∫1
−1
(1− t)α(1+ t)β|Pαβ
s (t)|2dt= 2(2 j+ 1)−1.
Using recurrent formulas for the Jacobi polynomials, we obtain
(1− t)Pαβ
s (t)=
[
1+ α2− β2
4 j( j+ 1)
]
Pαβ
s (t)+ AP αβ
s+1(t)+ BP αβ
s−1(t),
where A and B are constants. Since{Pαβ
s ; s= 0, 1,... } is an orthogonal
system on the interval(−1, 1) with the weight(1−t)α(1+t)β then by the
normalization, the integral is equal to the factor of Pαβ
s in the right-hand
side of (4.10.74) multiplied by 2(2 j+ 1)−1, i.e.,
2
2 j+ 1
[
1+ α2− β2
4 j( j+ 1)
]
= 2
2 j+ 1
[
1− nm
j( j+ 1)
]
.
It follows that
ˆW0 =
∑
m,m′
|m)(m|ˆW0|m′)(m′|
= 2
2 j+ 1
[
I− 1
j( j+ 1)
j∑
n=− j
n(n|S|n)
j∑
m=− j
m|m)(m|
]
which is the required formula (4.10.72).
4.11. Comments
Section 4.1. The classical treatise on continuous groups is Pontrjagin’s
book [113]. A detailed exposition of the compact parametric groups and
their representations addressed both to mathematicians and physicists is
presented in the book of /g225Zelobenko [148]. Kirillov [75] gives a concen-
trated account of the general representation theory and related topics of
functional analysis.

183 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The notion of covariant measurement extends onto general resolutions
of identity the important notion of imprimitivity system (which is in the
present terminology just simple covariant measurement) introduced by
Murray and von Neumann and studied by Mackey [91]. Presentations
of Mackey’s results with applications of quantum theory can be found in
Varadarajan [136] and Jauch [71]. The covariant measurements arise also
from the “covariant instruments” of Davies [26].
Section 4.2. The results of this section are due to Davies [26] and Ho-
levo [59, 64, 67]. Concerning operator-valued integration and the corre-
sponding Radon-Nikodym theorem see, e.g., Dunford and Schwarz [31].
Section 4.3. Mathematical statistics (see, e.g., Cramer [23], Ferguson
[34]) presents a natural framework for statistical measurement theory of
classical systems. If the unknown parameterθ is /g192nitely-valued, then one
speaks of “hypotheses testing”; if it is continuous one speaks of “estima-
tion”.
A possibility of fruitful application of the ideas of mathematical statis-
tics to quantum measurement problems was /g192rst demonstrated by Hel-
strom in the paper [50] devoted to optimal discrimination between two
quantum states. In Holevo [57, 58] the general resolutions of identity
were introduced as the noncommutative analog of classical randomized
procedures to develop quantum statistical decision theory. A detailed
physical account of quantum estimation and hypotheses testing theory is
presented in Helstrom’s book [53]. Mathematical consideration of the
general Bayes’ problem including existence questions and the relevant
integration theory can be found in the author’s work [59, 64]. The non-
commutative Hunt-Stein theorem appeared in [67]. Quantum maximum-
likelihood approach was developed in [59]. For relations with the classi-
cal maximum-likelihood see [64].
Section 4.4. Optimal angular measurements (4.4.22) were derived by
Helstrom [52] from the maximum-likelihood principle. He also showed
that they are Bayesian if the deviation function is 4 sin
2(ϕ−ˆϕ)/2. Theo-
rem 4.4.1 was proved by Holevo [67].
Section 4.5. There were several attempts to extend uncertainty relations
to angular quantities. Some of them use a variational measure of un-
certainty as in Judge [73], others are content with the uncertainty rela-
tions (4.5.30) for C and S operators, see Louisell [87], Carruthers and
Nieto [20]. The inequality based on the covariant uncertainty (4.5.27)
which is one of the type used in classical statistics of angular observa-
tions (see e.g., Mardia [98]) seems to be rather new.

184 Alexander Holevo
Section 4.6. The results of this and the next section are generalized nat-
urally to the case of parameter with values in arbitrary Abelian locally
compact group, see §2.3 of [178].
Section 4.7. Concerning the direct orthogonal integral of Hilbert spaces
see, e.g., Gelfand and Vilenkin [40]. The material of this section is taken
from Holevo [66], where the coordinate measurements for the three-
dimensional non-relativistic particle and for the photon are also dis-
cussed. The study of Newton and Wigner [105] (see also Wightman
[142], Varadarajan [136]) shows that a relativistic zero-mass object such
as photon is “nonlocalizable” in the sense that it has no coordinate ob-
servable, i.e., spectral measure satisfying the appropriate covariance con-
dition. Jauch and Piron [72] pointed out that this disagrees with experi-
mental evidence for photon localizability and discussed two possibilities
to describe it theoretically. The /g192rst one, which was ultimately adopted
by the authors, uses a nonadditive projection-valued set function, see also
Amrein [5]. The alternative approach using a covariant non-orthogonal
resolution of identity was developed by Holevo [66], where a rigorous
uncertainty relation for photon coordinates was also obtained.
Section 4.8. The covariant measurements in the case of irreducible rep-
resentation were studied by Holevo [59, 64, 67].
The well-known theorem of Bauer [9] says that an af/g192ne upper semi-
continuous functional on a compact convex subset of a locally convex
Hausdorff topological space attains its minimum at an extreme point of
the subset. The applicability of this theorem to the functional
R{M}=
gx D(x){M}+ gv D(v){M} follows from Theorem 7.1 of [64].
Section 4.9. The pure state estimation problem was discussed by Hel-
strom [52, 53] who observed that (4.9.68) is the maximum-likelihood
measurement. The results of this section were obtained by the author.
The “full model” in which the multidimensional parameter is the quan-
tum state itself deserves special attention both for its importance for ap-
plications and for special mathematical properties. One considers the
analog of the sample of repeated independent observations S
⊗n
θ = Sθ ⊗
···⊗ Sθ , where Sθ is an unknown state in d-dimensional Hilbert space
H. The case of unknown pure state Sθ =| θ)(θ| is the most studied one,
with special attention paid to qubit state (i. e. d = 2). For the devia-
tion functions of the type (4.9.69) the optimal resolution of the identity is
found in the symmetrized tensor product of n copies of the space H and
has the form M
∗(dθ) = S⊗n
θ νn(dθ), where νn(dθ) is unitarily invariant
measure on the variety of pure states. These estimates are consistent as
n →∞ . The asymptotic theory for the full model in the case of pure

185 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
states based on Rao-Cram ´er type inequalities was developed in [165],
while [172], [182] used the large deviations approach.
A fundamental distinction of the quantum estimation theory appears
in consideration of the asymptotic properties of estimates in a sample of
independent identical systems. In the paper [177], devoted to asymptotic
estimation of the shift parameter, it was pointed out that statistical infor-
mation in quantum models with independent observations can be strictly
superadditive. This property, similar to superadditivity of the Shannon
information in quantum information theory (see Section 5.1 in [179]),
means that statistical information for a composite system with indepen-
dent components can be strictly greater than sum of informations from
the subsystems. This property has a deep physical meaning: it is due to
the existence of entangled measurements in the composite system and as
such is dual to Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations for entangled quan-
tum states (see Section 2.4 of the Supplement). This superadditivity was
established for the full model [165, 172, 188].
The full model clearly displays another feature of quantum estima-
tion problem: the complexity sharply increases with passage from pure
to mixed states. (Note that in the classical statistics estimation of pure
states is trivial since pure classical states are just distributions degener-
ated at different points.) The estimation problem for an arbitrary state can
be split into two: /g192rst, estimation of the spectrum i. e. eigenvalues of the
density matrix and second, estimation of the eigenvectors. Estimation of
the spectrum requires new ideas: in [182] a solution based on represen-
tation theory for the permutation group of n elements was proposed. A
consistent and asymptotically ef/g192cient estimate is provided by lengths of
the rows of the Young diagram related to an irreducible representation of
the permutation group.
The noncommutative analog of the famous Le Cam’s Local Asymp-
totic Normality for the problem of estimation of an arbitrary mixed state
of a /g192nite dimensional quantum system was established by Guta and
Kahn following the work of Hayashi and Matsumoto (see [170] and ref-
erences therein). The proofs involve diverse mathematical tools, notably
representation theory for SU(d) and its tensor degrees as well as for the
symmetric group. It is remarkable that while the permutation symme-
try is present already in the classical estimation problem with i.i.d. ob-
servation, it is only the quantum case which requires the full power of
advanced representation theory.
Section 4.10. The material of this section is taken from Holevo [67].
The vectors | j; n); are the “coherent state vectors” for the represen-
tation of the rotation group introduced by Radcliffe [117] and Perelo-

186 Alexander Holevo
mov [108,109]. The formula for the matrix elements of the representation
is derived, e.g., in Wigner [145] or in Gelfand, Minlos and Shapiro [41].

Chapter 5
Gaussian states
5.1. Quasiclassicalstatesofthequantumoscillator
Consider a quantum degree of freedom, e.g., an oscillator, described by
the canonical observables q = Q, p = ℏP. The ground state |0)(0| is
the minimum-uncertainty state in which Q and P have zero mean values.
The state
|P, Q)(Q, P|= WQ,ℏP|0)(0|W∗
Q,ℏP (5.1.1)
(where to simplify notations we put|P, Q)≡| P, Q; ℏ/2ω), ω being the
oscillator frequency) can be regarded as the result of an external in/g193uence
onto the object in ground state, shifting the mean values of the canonical
observables but leaving their uncertainties unchanged.
Let us now assume that the in/g193uence has random nature, i.e., the
parameters
P and Q are random variables with probability distribution
μ(dP dQ). From the point of view of an experimenter who observes the
given quantum object but not the source of in/g193uence, determining the
values
P, Q in an individual experiment, the object’s state is statistically
described by the density operator
S=
∫
|α, β)(β, α|μ(dα dβ), (5.1.2)
where we changed P, Q to α, β. This represents averaging of (5.1.1) with
respect to the distribution of P and Q. The mean value of any real-valued
measurement M is then the average of the meansEP,Q{M} corresponding
to the states (5.1.1):
ES{M}=
∫
Eα,β{M}μ(dα dβ).
In particular the mean values of the canonical observables are equal to
those of the classical probability distribution μ
E
S(P)=
∫
αμ(dα dβ), ES(Q)=
∫
βμ(dα dβ).

188 Alexander Holevo
The states represented by (5.1.2) are called quasiclassical; the rela-
tion (5.1.2) de/g192nes a map from the simplex of probability distributions
μ into the convex set of quantum states. This map can be shown to be
one-to-one; it follows that there are quantum states which cannot be rep-
resented in the quasiclassical form (5.1.2) with a probability distribution
μ. Otherwise the set of quantum states would be simplex.
Assume that be object is in/g193uenced by a large numberk of indepen-
dent identical sources, so that the resulting in/g193uence is characterized by
parameters
P=
k∑
j=1
P j, Q=
k∑
j=1
Q j ,
where (P j , Q j) are independent identically distributed pairs of random
variables. Then by the classical central limit theorem the distribution
μ(dα dβ) of (
P, Q) will be approximately Gaussian as k →∞ . The
resulting state is a particular case of quantum Gaussian states to be dis-
cussed in this chapter.
Introducing the complex variable ζ = (2ℏω)
−1/2(ωβ+ iℏα) so that
|α, β)=| ζ) is the vector of coherent state (see Section 3.10), consider
the special quasiclassical Gaussian state
S= 1
π N
∫
|ζ)(ζ|e−|ζ|2/N d2ζ. (5.1.3)
The real parameter N is equal to the mean value of the number of quanta
N. To show this we calculate the matrix elements of S in the basis{|n)}
of the eigenvectors of N.W eh a v e
(n|S|m)= 1
π N
∫
(n|ζ)(ζ|m)e−|ζ|2/N d2ζ.
Using (3.10.102) and denoting ζ = reiϕ we get
(n|S|m)= 1
π N
∫2π
0
ei(n−m)ϕdϕ
∫∞
0
r dr· rn+me−r2(N+1)/N
= δnm
1
N+ 1
⎫
N
N+ 1
⎬n
.
It follows that the density operator S is diagonal in the Fock representa-
tion, namely
S= 1
N+ 1
∞∑
n=0
⎫
N
N+ 1
⎬n
|n)(n|. (5.1.4)

189 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Calculating the mean value of number of quanta we get
1
N+ 1
∞∑
n=0
n
⎫
N
N+ 1
⎬n
= N,
as required.
The basic role in statistical physics is played by the so called Gibbs
states. If the energy of the object can take discrete series of values {En},
then the Gibbs state is de/g192ned as the mixture of the statesSn correspond-
ing to de/g192nite values of the energy, the weight of the stateSn in the mix-
ture being proportional to exp(−En/kT ). Here T is the absolute temper-
ature, k is Boltzmann’s constant. A common belief strongly supported by
numerous model considerations is that the Gibbs state is the equilibrium
state to which the object is driven by in/g192nitely long interaction with sur-
rounding media at the temperature T . Since for the harmonic oscillator
E
n = ℏω(n+ 1
2), we see that (5.1.4) is the Gibbs state at the temperature
T ,i fw ep u t
N = 1
eℏω/kT − 1.
For this reason one says that the state (5.1.4) or (5.1.3) describes “thermal
noise” of the quantum harmonic oscillator in thermal equilibrium with the
media at the temperature T . The mean values of canonical observables
are zero for this state since the Gaussian distribution in (5.1.3) has zero
mean.
If the oscillator which was initially in the equilibrium stateS suffers an
external in/g193uence described by the displacement operatorW
Q,ℏP ≡ W¯a,
where a= (2ℏω)−1/2(ωQ+ iℏP), then the new state is
S¯a = W¯a SW∗
¯a . (5.1.5)
Taking into account (3.10.97) we get
S¯a = 1
π N
∫
|ζ)(ζ|e−|ζ−¯a|2/N d2ζ, (5.1.6)
so that the mean values of the canonical observables are
ES(Q)≡ Q=
√
2ℏ/ω Re a, ES(P)≡ P=
√
2ω/ℏIm¯a.
The states of the form (5.1.6) and their analogs for many degrees of free-
dom are widely used in quantum optics for the description of radiation
/g192elds, both chaotic as natural light and coherent as those generated by
lasers. The free electromagnetic /g192eld is known to be mathematically

190 Alexander Holevo
equivalent to an in/g192nite collection of harmonic oscillators. For our pur-
poses it is suf/g192cient to consider a /g192nite collection of oscillators with fre-
quencies ω
j ; j= 1,...,s . Let Pj , Q j ; j= 1,...s , be the canonical ob-
servables of this “cut-off radiation /g192eld”. Then the thermal background
radiation in the absence of external sources is described by the density
operator
S=
⨂
j
S( j), (5.1.7)
where S( j) is the equilibrium state (5.1.3) for the jth oscillator with the
mean number of quanta equal to N j = (exp(ℏωj /kT )− 1)−1. In/g193uence
of a source results in a change of the state of the radiation /g192eld. If the
simplest model of the in/g193uence (5.1.5) is adopted, then the resulting state
will be described by the density operator
S
¯a =
⨂
j
S( j)
¯a j , (5.1.8)
where S( j)
¯a j is the state of the form (5.1.6) for the jth oscillator. The mul-
tidimensional complex parameter ¯a =[¯ aj] characterizes the source of
in/g193uence. Thus the state (5.1.8) describes “signal plus noise”.
The states of the type (5.1.7), (5.1.8) possess certain attractive ana-
lytical properties which are interesting both for studying physical models
and also from a mathematical point of view. Since these properties are es-
sentially due to the “Gaussian” character of the states, it is convenient to
look upon them from a more general point of view and abstract from the
concrete representation (5.1.7), (5.1.8) characteristic for the states of the
radiation /g192eld. In this chapter we introduce and study a general class of
quantum Gaussian states displaying remarkable analogies with the clas-
sical Gaussian probability distributions.
5.2. TheCCRformanydegreesoffreedom
Let us rearrange the CCR (3.3.22) for one degree of freedom by intro-
ducing two-component vectors z=[ x, y] and the skew-symmetric form
/Delta1(z, z
′)= xy′− x′y.
By putting V(z)= W−x,y/μ, the CCR takes the form
V(z)V(z′)= ei/Delta1(z,z′)/2V(z+ z′). (5.2.9)
In the case of s degrees of freedom we act in the same way. Let xk, yk
be a pair of real numbers; we put zk =[ xk, yk] and z =[ z1,..., zs].

191 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Thus z will denote real 2 s-dimensional vectors. Introduce the bilinear
skew-symmetric form
/Delta1(z, z′)=
s∑
k=1
(xk y′
k − x′
k yk).
As in the cases= 1 we call therepresentation of the CCR(with s degrees
of freedom) any continuous family of unitary operators z → V(z) in a
Hilbert space H satisfying (5.2.9).
The canonical observables Pk , Qk; k= 1,...,s , arise from{V(z)} in
the following way. Since /Delta1is skew-symmetric,
/Delta1(z, z)≡ 0, (5.2.10)
and therefore by (5.2.9) the family{V(tz), t∈ R} for a /g192xedz is a group
of unitary operators. By Stone’s theorem
V(tz)= eitR (z), (5.2.11)
where R(z) is a self-adjoint operator. From (5.2.9), (5.2.11)
eitR (z)eit′R(z′) = eitt′/Delta1(z,z′)/2eiR(tz+t′z′)
= eitt′/Delta1(z,z′)eit′R(z′)eitR (z).
(5.2.12)
Differentiation with respect to t and t′at the point t = t′= 0g i v e s
formally
[R(z), R(z′)]=− i/Delta1(z, z′)I. (5.2.13)
A rigorous version of this commutation relation will be obtained in Sec-
tion 5.4. Let e
k be the vector z=[ z1,..., zs] such that z j = 0 for j̸=k
and zk =[ 1, 0],a n d hk be the similar vector with zk =[ 0, 1]. Putting
R(ek)= Pk, R(hk)= Qk and observing that
/Delta1(ek, hl)= δkl ,/Delta1 ( ek, el)= /Delta1(hk, hl)= 0, (5.2.14)
we get
[Pk, Ql]=− iδkl , [Pk, Pl]=[ Qk, Ql]=0,
i.e., the Heisenberg commutation relations (3.6.50) for s degrees of free-
dom.
From (5.2.12) formally R(z+ z′)= R(z)+ R(z′) so that
R(z)=
∑
k
(xk Pk + yk Qk),

192 Alexander Holevo
since z= ∑
k(xkek+ yk hk). This relation can be given precise meaning if
the right-hand side is understood as the (unique) self-adjoint extension of
the sum de/g192ned on a common dense domain (we shall not go into detail
here). Therefore we can write
V(z)= exp
[
i
s∑
k=1
(xk Pk + yk Qk)
]
.
Operators R(z) will also be called the canonical observables.
It is useful to look at this construction from the “coordinate-free” point
of view. Let Z be an arbitrary real linear space and /Delta1(z, z′) a bilinear
skew-symmetric form on Z. We assume that it is nondegenerate, i.e.,i f
/Delta1(z, z′)= 0 for all z∈ Z, then z′= 0. The pair (Z,/Delta1 )is called a sym-
plectic space. For any symplectic space we can de/g192ne arepresentation
of the CCR as the family of unitary operators {V(z), z ∈ Z} satisfying
(5.2.9) for all z, z′∈ Z (and an appropriate continuity condition). Then
the canonical observables{R(z), z∈ Z} can be de/g192ned as in (5.2.11).
This approach allows Z to have in/g192nite dimensionality. However since
we agreed to con/g192ne ourselves to a /g192nite number of degrees of freedom,
we assume from now on that Z is /g192nite-dimensional. It follows that the
dimensionality is necessarily even: dim Z = 2s. To see it introduce an
inner product α on Z and denote the resulting Euclidean space by(Z,α) .
Let
D be the associated operator of the form /Delta1in (Z,α) , i.e.,
/Delta1(z, z′)= α(z, D z′); z, z′∈ Z. (5.2.15)
By the properties of the form/Delta1the operator D is a nondegenerate skew-
symmetric (D ∗ =− D ) operator in (Z,α) . By a theorem in linear
algebra there is an orthonormal basis˜e1,˜h1;˜e2,˜h2; ... in (Z,α) in which
D has the matrix of the form
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
0 d
1 0
−d1 0
0 d2
0 −d2 0
...
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
, d
j > 0. (5.2.16)
In particular, since D is nondegenerate, Z needs to have even dimension-
ality.
A basis{ej, h j; j = 1,...,s } in (Z,/Delta1 )is called symplectic if it sat-
is/g192es (5.2.14). In a symplectic basis the form/Delta1has the canonical coor-
dinate representation /Delta1(z, z′)= ∑(x j y′
j − x′
j yj ), where z= ∑(x j ej +

193 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
yj h j), z′= ∑(x′
j ej + y′
j h j ). Thus symplectic bases in a symplectic
space play the same role as orthonormal bases in an Euclidean space. For
any symplectic basis the observables P
j = R(ej ), Q j = R(h j) satisfy
the Heisenberg commutation relations.
A particular symplectic basis {ej , h j} in the space of real 2 s-dimen-
sional vectors was described before (5.2.14). In any symplectic space
there are plenty of symplectic bases. Indeed, let α be an arbitrary inner
product on Z; then the basise
j = d−1/2
j ˜ej , h j = d−1/2˜h j ; j= 1,...,s is
symplectic by (5.2.15) and (5.2.16). Summing up and denotingaj = d−1
j
we have
Proposition5.2.1. A /g192nite-dimensional symplectic space(Z,/Delta1)has nec-
essarily even dimensionality 2s. For any inner product α there is a sym-
plectic basis{e
j, h j; j=1,...,s } in (Z,/Delta1 )in which α has the diagonal
matrix of the form
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
a
1 0 0
0 a1
0 a2 0
0 a2
...
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
, a
j > 0.
Transition from one symplectic basis to another is described by asym-
plectic operator T , satisfying
/Delta1(Tz , Tz′)= /Delta1(z, z′); z, z′∈ Z. (5.2.17)
For any symplectic operator| det T|=1. Indeed, let α be an inner prod-
uct in Z; then (5.2.17) reads
α(Tz , D Tz′)= α(z, D z′); z, z′∈ Z,
i.e., T∗D T = D, where T∗ is the operator adjoint to T in the Euclidean
space (Z,α) . Since det T∗ = det T and det D ̸=0, (det T)2 = 1.
Let z= ∑(x j ej + yj h j) be the coordinate representation of vector z
in a symplectic basis. Introduce the Lebesgue measure in Z putting
d2s z= dx1 dy1···d xs dys.
It follows that the measure is invariant under the symplectic transforma-
tions and the de/g192nition does not depend on the particular choice of a
symplectic basis.
As an illustration consider the simplest case of dim Z= 2 (one degree
of freedom). Let{e, h} be a symplectic basis in (Z,/Delta1 ), i.e., /Delta1(e, h)= 1

194 Alexander Holevo
h
h'
e
e'
Figure5.1.
and x, y be the components of vector z. Let us choose a Cartesian frame
on the plane and take the unit vectors of the frame fore and h (Figure 5.1).
The fact that e and h are orthogonal and have unit length at this picture
does not re/g193ect any geometrical property of symplectic basis, and is just
a matter of arbitrariness. However, this can be interpreted by introducing
the inner productα(z, z
′)= xx′+ yy′in Z which is related to the basis as
in Proposition 5.2.1. From what was said above it follows that a different
pair of vectors{e
′, h′} constitutes a symplectic basis if and only if the area
of the oriented parallelogram with the sides e′, h′is equal to+1.
5.3. ProofoftheStone-vonNeumannuniquenesstheorem.
TheWeyltransform
Let z→ V(z) be a representation of the CCR, f (z) a complex Lebesgue
integrable function on a symplectic space (Z,/Delta1 ). The integral
V( f )= (2π)−s
∫
f (z)V(−z)d2s z (5.3.18)
is well de/g192ned in the sense of weak convergence1. The correspondence
f → V( f ) is often called the Weyl transform. The following properties
follow easily from the de/g192nition and the CCR (5.2.9):
(1) V( f (z))
∗ = V( f (−z));
(2) V( f1)V( f2)= V( f1× f2),
1 Moreover it converges as the Bochner’s integral of a function with values in the Banach space of
all bounded operators.

195 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
where
f1× f2(z)= (2π)−s
∫
f1(w) f2(z− w)ei/Delta1(w,z)/2d2sw
(3) V( f (z))V(w)= V( f (z+ w)ei/Delta1(w,z)/2),
V(w)∗V( f (z))V(w)= V( f (z)ei/Delta1(w,z)).
Moreover the correspondence f → V( f ) is one-to-one: V( f ) = 0
implies f (z)= 0 for almost all z∈ Z. Indeed, from (3)
∫
ei/Delta1(w,z) f (z)(ϕ|V(−z)ψ)d2s z= 0; w∈ Z; ϕ,ψ ∈ H,
whence by the uniqueness property of the usual Fourier transform
f (z)(ϕ|V(−z)ψ)= 0 so that f (z)= 0 for almost all z∈ Z.
It follows that if z → Vj(z), j = 1, 2 are two representations of the
CCR, then the correspondence V1( f )↔ V2( f ) is one-to-one. Accord-
ing to the properties (1) and (2), this correspondence preserves algebraic
operations and the Hermitean conjugation. In fact there is the stronger
Stone-von Neumann uniqueness theorem (for /g192nite number degrees of
freedom);
Theorem5.3.1. Any two (continuous) irreducible representation of the
CCR are unitary equivalent. Any representation is the direct orthogonal
sum of irreducible representations.
Proof. Introducing the inner product
j(z, z
′)=
s∑
k=1
(xk x′
k + yk y′
k)
in Z where[xk, yk],[x′
k, y′
k] are the components of the vectors z, z′in a
/g192xed symplectic basis, consider the function
f0(z)= e− j(z,z)/4.
Put P = V( f0). Since f0(z)>0, P ̸=0. Using the properties (2) and
(3) we obtain after some calculation the important identity
PV (w)P= f0(w)P; w∈ Z. (5.3.19)
It follows that P2 = P. Moreover since f0 is real, P∗ = P by (1). Thus
P is a projection onto a subspace M of the representation space H.

196 Alexander Holevo
If ϕ,ψ ∈ M, then using (5.2.9) and (5.3.19)
(V(z)ϕ|V(w)ψ) = (V(z)Pϕ|V(w)Pψ)
= ei/Delta1(w,z)/2(ϕ|PV (w− z)Pψ)
= ei/Delta1(w,z)/2 f0(w− z)(ϕ|ψ).
(5.3.20)
Let{eα} be an orthonormal basis in M. Then (5.3.20) implies that the
subspaces Mα =[ V(z)eα] generated by the vectors of the form V(z)Eα,
z ∈ Z, are orthogonal for different α. By construction Mα are invariant
subspaces of the representation operators V(z), z ∈ Z. Therefore if the
representation is irreducible then dim M = 1. The converse is also true:
if the representation z→ V(z) is reducible, then H = H1 ⊕ H2 where
Hj are invariant subspaces; then applying the above construction to H j
instead of H we would get the projections Pj in H j with P = P1 ⊕ P2
so that dim M > 1.
Now from (5.3.19)
PV (z)eα = PV (z)Peα = f0(z)eα;
so that P is an operator of rank 1 in Mα
Pψ= c(ψ)eα,ψ ∈ Mα,
therefore z → V(z) acts irreducibly in Mα. Let us prove that H =⨁
α Mα. Denote by H0 the orthogonal complement of ⨁
α Mα in H.
Then H0 is an invariant subspace of {V(z)}; moreover PH0 = 0. It
follows that H0 = 0. Otherwise applying the whole construction to H0
instead of H we would obtain P = 0 which contradicts f0 ̸≡0. This
proves that any representation is the direct orthogonal sum of irreducible
representations acting in the subspace
Mα.
Let z → Vj(z) be irreducible representations of the CCR in Hilbert
spaces H j , j = 1, 2. Then Pj = Vj( f0) is the one-dimensional pro-
jection onto the unit vector ej ∈ H j and H j =[ V(z)ej]. De/g192ne the
operator U from H2 to H1 putting UV2(z)e2 = V1(z)e1. Then U maps
a dense set in H2 onto a dense set in H1, preserving the values of inner
products, since by (5.3.20)
(V1(z)e1|V1(w)e1)= exp
[1
2i/Delta1(w,z)
]
f0(z− w)
= (V2(z)e2|V2(w)e2).

197 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Therefore it can be extended by continuity to an isometric map from H2
onto H1. By construction
U∗V1(z)U = V2(z); z∈ Z,
and the theorem is proved.
We now restrict to irreducible representations. The following multi-
dimensional analog of Proposition 3.5.1 is proved in the same way as for
s= 1.
Proposition5.3.2. Let z → V(z) be irreducible representation of the
CCR in a Hilbert space
H. Then the matrix elements (ϕ|V(z)ψ) are
square-integrable functions of z. If {ej} is an orthonormal basis in H,
then the functions {(2π)−1/2(ej|V(z)ek)} form an orthonormal basis in
the space L 2(Z) of complex square-integrable functions on Z.
Let T be a trace-class operator in the representation space. De/g192ne
Fz[T]=Tr TV (z); z∈ Z. (5.3.21)
As we shall see, the “noncommutative Fourier transform” T → Fz[T]
is inverse to the Weyl transform (5.3.18). The following properties result
from the CCR and general properties of trace (see Section 2.7):
(1)
F0[T]=Tr T;| Fz[T]|≤∥T∥1;
(2) Fz[T∗]= F−z[T];
(3) Fz[TV (w)]= Fz+w[T]·e i/Delta1(z,w)/2,
Fz[V(w)∗TV (w)]= Fz[T]·e i/Delta1(z,w).
The transform (5.3.21) satis/g192es the following “noncommutative Parceval
relation”.
Theorem5.3.3. The map T →
Fz[T] extends uniquely to an isometric
map from the Hilbert space T 2(H ) of Hilbert-Schmidt operators in H
onto L 2(Z), so that
Tr T∗
1 T2 = (2π)−s
∫
Fz[T1]Fz[T2]d2s z; Tj ∈ T 2(H ). (5.3.22)
Proof. If we prove that for any Hermitean trace-class operator
Tr T 2 = (2π)−s
∫
|Fz[T]|2d2s z,

198 Alexander Holevo
then (5.3.22) for trace-class operators will follow by polarization and lin-
earity. Let{t
j} be the eigenvalues of T ,{ej} the corresponding eigenvec-
tors. Then by Theorem 2.7.1 the trace of TV (z) is equal to
Fz[T]=
∑
j
tj(ej|V(z)ej), (5.3.23)
where ∑|tj| <∞. Using Proposition 5.3.2 we see that the series con-
verges in L 2(Z) and
(2π)−s
∫
|Fz[T]|2d2s z=
∑
j
t2
j|(ej|ej )|2 = Tr T 2.
Thus T → Fz[T] maps isometrically the set of trace-class operators,
which is a dense subspace of the Hilbert space T2(H ) into the Hilbert
space L 2(Z). Since the functions Fz[|ej)(ek|] =(ek|V(z)ej) form a
basis in L 2(Z), the range of this map is dense in L 2(Z). Therefore
the map T → Fz[T] uniquely extends by continuity to the isometric
map of T2(H ) onto L 2(Z) so that (5.3.22) holds for Hilbert-Schmidt
operators.
Corollary5.3.4. The state S in pure if and only if
(2π)−s
∫
|Fz[S]|2d2s z= 1.
Proof. By Theorem 5.3.3
(2π)−s
∫
|Fz[S]|2d2s z= Tr S2 =
∑
j
s2
j ,
where sj are the eigenvalues of the density operator S. But sj ≥ 0,∑sj = 1 whence ∑s2
j ≤ 1 with the sign of equality achieved if one
and only if one of sj is equal to 1, and the others are zero. This means
that S is a one-dimensional projection, i.e., a density operator of a pure
state.
Corollary5.3.5. For any Hilbert-Schmidt operator T
T = (2π)−s
∫
Fz[T]V(−z)d2s z, (5.3.24)
where the integral converges weakly.

199 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Proof. Putting T1 =| ϕ)(ψ| in (5.3.22) and taking into account that
(ψ|V(z)ϕ)= (ϕ|V(z)∗ψ)= (ϕ|V(−z)ψ)
we get
(2π)−s
∫
Fz[T](ϕ|V(−z)ψ)d2s z= Tr|ψ)(ϕ|T = (ϕ|Tψ), (5.3.25)
which is just the detailed form of (5.3.24). The “inversion formula”
(5.3.24) relates the transforms T → f (z)=
Fz[T] and f → T = V( f )
showing that they are mutually inverse:
T = V(Fz[T]).
In particular the map T → Fz[T] in one-to-one.
The inversion formula enables us to obtain the expression for the kernel
of an operator T in any irreducible representation through the function
Fz[T]. As an example we consider the Schr ¨odinger representation for
one degree of freedom, and prove the following relation for the kernel of
a Hilbert-Schmidt operator T in
L 2(R):
(ξ|T|ξ′)= (2π)−1
∫
Fξ−ξ′,y[T]e−i(ξ+ξ′)y/2dy, (5.3.26)
where
Fx,y[T]=Tr TV (x, y)≡ Tr TW−x,y/μ.
Indeed from (3.4.32)
(ϕ|V(−x,−y)ψ)=
∫
(ϕ|ξ)e−iy(ξ−x/2)(ξ− x|ψ)dξ (5.3.27)
for any ϕ, ψ∈ H. Therefore by (5.3.25)
∫∫
(ϕ|ξ)(ξ|T|ξ′)(ξ′|ψ)dξ dξ′
= (2π)−1
∫∫∫
Fx,y[T](ϕ|ξ)e−iy(ξ−x/2)(ξ− x|ψ)dx dy dξ
with all the functions being square-integrable so that it is possible to per-
form integration in arbitrary order. Putting ξ
′= ξ− x and using arbi-
trariness of ϕ, ψ we get (5.3.26).

200 Alexander Holevo
In the same way using (5.3.21) and (2.7.83) we obtain
Fx,y[T]=
∫
(ξ+ x|T|ξ)eiy(ξ+x/2)dξ.
Using this relation and (3.5.42) we get the Weyl transform of the density
operator (5.1.1):
Fx,y[|P, Q)(P, Q|]
= exp
[
i(x P+ yQ)− 1
4
⎫ℏ
ω x2+ ω
ℏ y2
⎬]
.
(5.3.28)
We now also have tools for
Proof of Proposition 3.6.1. Consider the classical characteristic function
of the probability distribution of the measurement E(dx dv) with respect
to the state S⊗ S0. According to (2.7.78) it is
∫∫
ei(ξ x+ημv)μE
S⊗S0 (dx dv)= Tr S⊗ S0ei(ξ Q+ηP).
Using (3.6.54) we get
ei(ξ Q+ηP) = ei(ξ Q+ηP) ⊗ ei(−ξ Q0+ηP0),
so that the characteristic function is equal to
Tr Sei(ξ Q+ηP)· (ψ|ei(−ξ Q0+ηP0)ψ).
Using (3.4.32), (3.4.37) we can reduce the second factor to the form
(ψ|W−η,−ξ/μψ)=
∫
ψ(λ)e−iξ(λ+η/2)ψ(λ+ η)dλ
= (ψ|W−η,ξ/μ ψ)= Tr Sψ ei(ξ Q0+ηP0).
Since
Tr Sei(ηP+ξ Q) = Fη,ξ[S],
the characteristic function of the probability distribution μE
S⊗S0 (dx dv) is
equal to
Fη,ξ[S]· Fη,ξ[Sψ].
Since by Theorem 5.3.3 both factors are Lebesgue square-integrable their
product is an integrable function. Therefore the inverse Fourier transform
μ
(2π)2
∫∫
e−i(ξ x+ημv) Fη,ξ[S]· Fη,ξ[Sψ]dη dξ

201 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
is de/g192ned, giving the probability density ofμE
S⊗S0 . Using property (3) of
the “noncommutative Fourier transform” we get
ei(ξ x+ημv) Fη,ξ[Sψ]= Fη,ξ[Wx,v Sψ W∗
x,v].
By the “Parceval relation” (5.3.22) the probability density of μE
S⊗S0 is
μ
(2π)2
∫∫
Fη,ξ[S]· Fη,ξ[Wx,v Sψ W∗
x,v]dη dξ
= μ
2π Tr SWx,v Sψ W∗
x,v = (ψ|W∗
x,v SWx,vψ) μ
2π ,
and thus it is the same as the probability density (5.6.58) of the measure-
ment M. This proves the proposition.
5.4. Characteristicfunctionandmomentsofstate
Consider the transform Fz[T] of a Hermitean trace-class operator T .I f
T ≥ 0, then Fz[T] possesses the following property of /Delta1-positive de/g192-
niteness: for any n; z1,... zn ∈ Z and c1,...c n ∈ C
n∑
j,k=1
cj¯ck Fz j−zk[T] exp
[1
2i/Delta1(z j, zk)
]
≥ 0. (5.4.29)
Indeed by (5.2.9) and (5.3.22) this is nothing but
Tr T
[∑
k
ck V(zk)
]∗ [∑
j
cj V(z j)
]
which is always nonnegative, if T ≥ 0.
We call the transform Fz[S] of a density operator S the characteristic
function of S, having in mind the analogy with characteristic function of
classical probability distribution. The following is the noncommutative
analog of the Bochner-Khinchin theorem.
Theorem5.4.1. For
F(z) to be characteristic function of a quantum
state the following conditions are necessary and suf/g192cient:
(1) F(0)= 1, F(z) is continuous at z= 0;
(2) F(z) is /Delta1-positive de/g192nite.
Proof. Let S be a density operator; then F0[S]=Tr S= 1. The condi-
tion (2) follows from positivity of S. To prove continuity note that
Fz[S]=
∑
j
sj(ej|V(x)ej),

202 Alexander Holevo
where sj are the eigenvalues andej the eigenvectors ofS. By the assumed
continuity of the representation z → V(z) each term in the series is a
continuous function of z; moreover the series converges uniformly since
|(ej|V(z)ej )|≤1 and ∑sj <∞. Thus F(z) is continuous for allz∈ Z,
and the necessity is proved.
Turning to suf/g192ciency we /g192rst show that continuity atz = 0 and
/Delta1-positive de/g192niteness imply uniform continuity ofF(z) for all z (in
analogy with ordinary characteristic functions). For this take n = 3i n
(5.4.29) and the values of z equal to 0, z1, z2. Then (5.4.29) signi/g192es
positive de/g192niteness of the Hermitean form inc1, c2, c3 with the matrix
⎡
⎣
1
F(−z1) F(−z2)
F(z1) 1 F(z1− z2)ei/Delta1(z1,z2)/2
F(z2) F(z2− z1)ei/Delta1(z2,z1)/2 1
⎤
⎦ .
By Sylvester’s criterion
1−
F(z1)F(−z1)≥ 0,
1+ 2R eF(z1)F(z2)F(z2− z1)ei/Delta1(z1,z2)/2
−| F(z2)|2−| F(z1)|2−| F(z1− z2)|2 ≥ 0.
The /g192rst inequality implies
F(−z)= F(z) (5.4.30)
and
|F(z)|2 ≤ 1. (5.4.31)
Rearranging the second inequality we get
|F(z2)− F(z1)|2
≤ 1−| F(z2− z1)|2− 2R eF(z1)F(z2)[1− F(z2− z1)ei/Delta1(z2,z1)/2].
Using (5.4.30), (5.4.31) we obtain the /g192nal inequality
|F(z2)− F(z1)|2 ≤ 4|1− F(z2− z1)ei/Delta1(z2,z1)/2|,
which proves the assertion.
We now construct a Hilbert space and a density operator in it for which
F(z) is the characteristic function. Consider the operator ˆV0(z) acting on
a function ψ(w), w∈ Z, by the formula
ˆV0(z)ψ(w) = exp
[
−1
2i/Delta1(z,w)
]
ψ(z+ w).

203 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
It is easy to check that the operators {ˆV0(z); z ∈ Z} satisfy the CCR
(5.2.9). We are now going to de/g192ne the inner product with respect to
which these operators will be unitary. Consider the linear space ˆ
H0 of
functions on Z of the form
ψ(w) =
[∑
k
ck V(zk)
]
1(w)≡
∑
k
ck exp
[
−1
2i/Delta1(zk,w)
]
,w ∈ Z,
where 1(w) is the function which is identically equal to one. Introduce
in ˆH0 the sesquilinear form
(ψ(1)|ψ(2))=
∑
j,k
c(2)
j ¯c(1)
k F(z(2)
j − z(1)
k ) exp
[1
2i/Delta1(z(2)
j , z(1)
k )
]
,
where ψ(α) =[ ∑
j c(α)
j V(z(α)
j )]1; α= 1, 2. By /Delta1-positive de/g192niteness
(ψ|ψ)≥ 0,ψ ∈ ˆH0,
so that (·|·) is pre-inner product on ˆH0. Moreover
(ˆV0(z)ψ1|ˆV0(z)ψ2)= (ψ1|ψ2); ψ1,ψ 2 ∈ ˆH0 (5.4.32)
for all z∈ Z.
Denote by ˆH the completion of ˆH0 with respect to this pre-inner
product. By (5.4.32) the operators ˆV0(z) extend uniquely by continuity
to unitary operators ˆV(z) in ˆH. Thus z → V(z) is a representation of
the CCR in ˆH, if we prove its continuity. For this it is suf/g192cient to check
continuity of the functions (ψ(1)|ˆV(·)ψ(2)) = (ψ(1)|ˆV0(·)ψ(2)) for ψ(α)
lying in ˆH0. But for such ψ’s
(ψ(1)|ˆV0(z)ψ(2))
=
∑
j,k
c(z)
j ¯c(1)
k exp
[1
2i/Delta1(z(2)
j + z, z(1)zk − z)
]
F(z(2)
j + z− z(1)
k ),
and the required continuity follows from continuity of F(z).
From the de/g192nitions ofˆV(z) and the inner product
(1|ˆV(z)1)= F(z). (5.4.33)
By Theorem (5.3.18) the constructed representation z → ˆV(z) is uni-
tarily equivalent to the direct orthogonal sum of copies of an irreducible
representation z→ V(z) in a Hilbert space
H :
ˆV(z)= U−1
⎡
⎢
⎣
V(z) 0
V(z)
0 ...
⎤
⎥
⎦ U.

204 Alexander Holevo
The operator U maps isometrically ˆH onto H ⊕ H ⊕···. Put
U1= ψ1⊕ ψ2⊕··· (5.4.34)
and de/g192neS= ∑
j |ψj)(ψj| in H. Apparently S≥ 0 and
Tr S=
∑
j
(ψj|ψj)= (U1|U1)= (1|1)= 1.
Thus S is a density operator. From (5.4.33) and (5.4.34) we get
F(z)= (1|ˆV(z)1)=
∑
j
(ψj|V(z)ψj)= Tr SV (z),
so that F(z)is the characteristic function ofS. The theorem is proved.
There is an interesting peculiarity which has no analogy in probabil-
ity theory. Since any trace-class operator is Hilbert-Schmidt, Fz[S] is
square-integrable by Theorem 5.3.3. This means that continuity and /Delta1-
positive de/g192niteness imply square integrability ofF(z). Notice that if
the square integrability is postulated the proof of suf/g192ciency becomes
much simpler. Indeed, basing on Theorem 5.3.3 introduce the Hilbert-
Schmidt operator S = V(
F ). The conditions (1) and (2) imply S ≥ 0
and Tr S = 1s ot h a tS is a density operator and F(z) = Fz[S] by the
inversion formula.
Moments of a probability distribution are easily expressed through the
derivatives of its characteristic function. An analogous relation exists in
the noncommutative theory. Let
R(z)=
∫
λE
z(dλ)
be the spectral representation of the canonical observableR(z). Consider
its probability distribution
μz
S(B)= Tr SE z(B); B∈ A (R),
with respect to a state S. The function Ftz[S], t ∈ R, is a classical
characteristic function of μz
S(dλ) since by (2.7.78)
Ftz[S]=Tr SeitR (z) =
∫
eitλμz
S(dλ).
Assume that nth absolute moment of the distribution μz
S is /g192nite; then it
is well known from probability theory that the function Ftz[S] is n times
differentiable and the nth moment of μz
s is equal to
mn(z)= i−n dn
dtn Ftz[S]
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
. (5.4.35)

205 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
If n is even, them, conversely, the existence of the nth derivative at t= 0
implies the /g192niteness of thenth moment.
From (5.4.35) it is clear that mn(z) is a homogeneous polynomial in z
of degree n. The main interest for us is the mean value of the state
m1(z)≡ m(z)= ES(R(z))=
∫
λμz
S(dλ),
which is linear in z and the second moment m2(z)=
∫
λ2μz
S(dλ), which
is a quadratic form in z. Introducing the corresponding real symmetric
bilinear form
m2(z, z′)=− ∂2
∂t∂s Ftz+sz′[S]
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=s=0
we can de/g192ne thecorrelation function of the state as
α(z, z′)= m2(z, z′)− m(z)m(z′), (5.4.36)
so that
α(z, z)= DS(R(z))=
∫
(λ− m(z))2μz
S(dλ).
We call S the state with /g192nite second momentsif m2(z)<∞ for all
z ∈ Z. Recall that L 2
h(S) is the real Hilbert space of the operators
which are square-summable with respect to S. Then according to Section
2.9 m2(z)<∞ implies R(z) ∈ L 2
h(S) and the relation (2.9.100) and
(2.9.101) show that
m(z)=⟨I, R(z)⟩S,α ( z, z)=⟨R(z)− m(z), R(z)− m(z)⟩S.
By polarization the correlation function is equal to
α(z, z′)=⟨R(z)− m(z), R(z′)− m(z′)⟩S. (5.4.37)
Now we turn to a rigorous version of the Heisenberg commutation
relation (5.2.13) which reads
[R(z), R(z′)]S = /Delta1(z, z′); z, z′∈ Z. (5.4.38)
To prove it we need
Lemma5.4.2. Let M(dλ) be a measurement with /g192nite second moments
and X
M =
∫
λM(dλ) is de/g192ned as in Section2.9. Consider the family of
bounded operators
Vt =
∫
eitλ M(dλ)

206 Alexander Holevo
as a function of t with values in L 2
±
(S). Then
XM = i−1 d
dt Vt
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
,
the derivative being taken in L 2
±
(S).
Proof. We need to show that
Vt − I
it → XM in L 2
±
(S) as t→ 0.
By the inequality (2.9.109) it is suf/g192cient to prove that
eiλt − 1
it → λ in L 2(μS).
The pointwise convergence is evident; moreover
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐λ− e
iλt − 1
it
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
≤ 4λ2,
since ⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
e
iλt − 1
it
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐=
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
sin λt/2
t/2
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐≤ λ.
By the /g192niteness of second moment
∫
λ
2μS(dλ)<∞, and by the Lebesgue
dominated convergence theorem
∫⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐λ− e
iλt − 1
it
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
μS(dλ)→ 0,
what is required.
The lemma implies that if m2(z)<∞, then
R(z)= i−1 d
dt V(tz)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
in L 2
±
(S). (5.4.39)
Multiplying (5.2.12) by S, taking trace and using V(z)∗ = v(−z),w eg e t
⟨V(−tz), V(sz′)⟩−
S = eits/Delta1(z,z′)⟨V(−tz), V(sz′)⟩+
S .
Differentiating with the help of (5.4.39), we obtain
−⟨R(z), R(z′)⟩−
S = i/Delta1(z, z′)−⟨R(z), R(z′)⟩+
S .

207 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Taking into account the second relation in (2.8.97) we obtain (5.4.38).
Taking into account (2.8.92) we can also write
[R(z)− m(z), R(z
′)− m(z′)]S = /Delta1(z, z′). (5.4.40)
Proposition 2.8.3 together with (5.4.37) and (5.4.40) implies that the
correlation function of a state with /g192nite second moments satis/g192es the
equivalent inequalities
α(z, z)α(z′, z′)≥ 1
4/Delta1(z, z′)2,
α(z, z)+ α(z′, z′)≥ /Delta1(z, z′); z, z′∈ Z. (5.4.41)
The /g192rst of these is just the rigorous Heisenberg uncertainty relation for
the canonical observables R(z), R(z
′). Moreover it follows from (2.8.98)
that
[α(z j , zk)± 1
2 i/Delta1(z j, zk)]≥0 (5.4.42)
for any n and z1,... zn ∈ Z.
Lemma5.4.3. Let S be density operator of a state with /g192nite second
moments, then
Fz[SR (z1)]=[− 1
2/Delta1(z, z1)− i∇z1]Fz[S],
Fz[R(z1)S]=[ 1
2/Delta1(z, z1)− i∇z1]Fz[S],
Fz[S◦ R(z1)]=− i∇z1 Fz[S], (5.4.43)
Fz[[R(z1), S]]= /Delta1(z, z1)Fz[S], (5.4.44)
where∇z1 is the derivative along the direction z1:
∇z1 F(z)= d
dt F(z+ tz 1)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
.
Proof. Since R(z1)∈ L 2(S), the operators SR (z1) ,... in the left-hand
sides are trace-class by Proposition 2.8.2 and have square-integrable
transforms
Fz[SR (z1)],... It is suf/g192cient to check the /g192rst relation. We
have
Fz[SR (z1)]=Tr (SR (z1))V(z)
=⟨V(−z), R(z1)⟩0
S.
According to (5.4.39)
Fz[SR (z1)]=i −1 d
dt⟨V(−z), V(tz 1)⟩−
S
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
= i−1 d
dt Tr SV (tz 1)V(z)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
.

208 Alexander Holevo
Taking into account the CCR we get
Fz[SR (z1)]=i −1 d
dt Fz+tz 1[S]eit/Delta1(z1,z)/2
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
,
as required.
It is not dif/g192cult to extend these formulas to a wider class of operators
S but we shall not do it.
5.5. StructureofgeneralGaussianstates
Let us calculate the characteristic function of the quasiclassical state
(5.1.2). Using (5.3.28) we get
Fx,y[S]=exp
[
−1
4
⎫ℏ
ω x2+ ω
ℏ y2
⎬]∫
exp[i(αx+ βy)]μ(dα dβ)
= F0(x, y)·¯μ(x, y),
(5.5.45)
where F0(x, y) is the characteristic function of the ground state |0)(0|,
and ˜μ(x, y) is the classical characteristic function of the probability dis-
tribution μ. Consider the quasiclassical Gaussian state (5.1.7). Returning
to real variables by letting
ζ = (2ℏω)−1/2(ωβ+ iℏα), ¯a= (2ℏω)−1/2(ωQ+ iℏP),
we can write its density operator in the form
SP,Q = 1
2π N
∫∫
|α, β)(β, α|
× exp
{
− 1
2N
[ℏ
ω(α− P)2+ ω
ℏ(β− Q)2
]}
dα dβ.
(5.5.46)
The characteristic function of the Gaussian distribution is
¯μ(x, y)= exp
[
i(Px + Qy )− N
2
⎫ω
ℏ x2+ ℏ
ω y2
⎬]
so that by (5.5.45)
Fx,y[SP,Q]=exp [i(Px + Qy )− 1
2(σ 2
P x2+ σ 2
Q y2)], (5.5.47)

209 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
where
σ2
P = ω
ℏ
⎫
N+ 1
2
⎬
,σ 2
Q = ℏ
ω
⎫
N+ 1
2
⎬
with N = σPσQ − 1
2 .
For many degrees of freedom the characteristic function of the state
(5.1.8) is apparently the product of the factors of the type (5.5.46):
∏
k
exp
[
i(Pk xk + Qk yk)− 1
2(σ2
Pk x2
k + σ2
Qk y2
k )
]
. (5.5.48)
We thus see that the characteristic function of the quantum state (5.5.46)
has the same analytic form as the characteristic function of a Gaussian
distribution though the variances are not arbitrary positive numbers but
are subject to the uncertainty relation σ
2
Pσ 2
Q ≥ 1
4 .
Basing on this analogy we introduce the following general de/g192nition.
Let z → V(z) be an irreducible representation of the CCR on a sym-
plectic space (Z,/Delta1 ). The state S in the representation space H is called
Gaussian if its characteristic function has the form
Fz[S]=exp [im(z)− 1
2α(z, z)], (5.5.49)
where m(z) is a linear functional,α(z, z′) is a bilinear symmetric form on
Z. The function (5.5.49) is in/g192nitely differentiable and therefore all mo-
ments of the Gaussian state are /g192nite. The relations (5.4.35) and (5.4.36)
imply that m(z) is the mean value and α(z, z
′) is the correlation function
of S as anticipated in the notation.
Theorem5.5.1. For (5.5.49) to be the characteristic function of a quan-
tum state it is necessary and suf/g192cient thatα(z, z′) satisfy one of the
equivalent relations (5.4.41), (5.4.42).
Proof. The necessity follows from the fact that α is the correlation func-
tion of a quantum state. To prove suf/g192ciency it is enough to check/Delta1-
positive de/g192niteness of the function (5.5.49),i.e.,
∑
j,k
cj¯ck exp
[
im(z j )− im(zk)− 1
2α(z j − zk, z j − zk)
+1
2i/Delta1(z j, zk)
]
≥ 0
for any z j ∈ Z, cj ∈ C. Putting bj = cj exp[im(z j )− 1
2α(z j, z j)] rewrite
it in the form
∑
j,k
bj¯bk exp
[
α(z j, zk)+ 1
2i/Delta1(z j, zk)
]
≥ 0.

210 Alexander Holevo
Note that the matrix
[α(z j , zk)+ 1
2 i/Delta1(z j, zk)]
is positive de/g192nite by (5.4.42); and referring to a result of Schur which
says that positive de/g192niteness of a matrix[a
jk] implies positive de/g192nite-
ness of[exp ajk] the theorem is proved.
Denote by Sm the Gaussian state with the mean m(z) and /g192xed cor-
relation function α(z, z′). We shall show that Sm can be regarded as a
result of an “in/g193uence” on the stateS = S0 described by a unitary dis-
placement operator. Since the form /Delta1is nondegenerate, there exists the
unique vector m/Delta1∈ Z such that
m(z)= /Delta1(m/Delta1, z), z∈ Z
(this is easily seen in the coordinate representation). Then
Sm = V(m/Delta1)∗ SV (m/Delta1).
For this it is suf/g192cient to check that characteristic functions of both sides
are equal. Using property (3) of the transform T →
Fz[T] (see Section
5.3), we have
Fz[V(m/Delta1)∗ SV (m/Delta1)]= Fz[S]ei/Delta1(m/Delta1,z) = Fz[Sm],
as required.
Consider now the Euclidean space(Z,α) . By the Riesz-Frechet lemma
there is a unique mα ∈ Z satisfying
m(z)= α(mα, z), z∈ Z
(in the /g192nite-dimensional case this is easily seen in the coordinate repre-
sentation). Introduce
D as the associated operator of the form /Delta1,i.e.,
the operator satisfying (5.2.15) where α is the correlation function. Then
mα =− D m/Delta1so that
Sm = V(D−1mα)SV (D−1mα)∗. (5.5.50)
The condition (5.4.41) for the correlation function sets certain restric-
tion onto the operator D. Putting z′=− 1
2 D z in (5.4.41) we get
I+ 1
4 D 2 ≥ 0i n (Z,α) . (5.5.51)

211 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Let{ej , h j} be the symplectic basis in which D has the matrix (5.2.15).
From (5.5.51)
aj ≡ d−1
j ≥ 1
2.
Since
α(z, z)=
∑
j
aj(x2
j + y2
j ),
where[x j, yj] are the components of the vector z in this basis, the char-
acteristic function of the state Sm takes the form
∏
j
exp
[
i(P
′
j x j + Q
′
j yj)− aj
2 (x2
j + y2
j )
]
. (5.5.52)
Here we put
P
′
j = ESm (P′
j ), Q
′
j = ESm (Q′
j), aj = DSm (Q′
j)= DSm (P′
j ),
where P′
j = R(ej ), Q′
j = R(h j).
Note that if we start with a coordinate form of the CCR related to some
/g192xed set of canonical observablesPk , Qk as in Section 5.2, then the sym-
plectic basis in which the characteristic function of a Gaussian state has
the simplest form (5.5.52) may be arbitrary. The new canonical observ-
ables P
′
j , Q′
j need not coincide with Pk, Qk and are in general related to
them through a linear transformation preserving the Heisenberg commu-
tation relations (such transformations are called canonical). For example,
the characteristic function (5.5.48) is reduced to the form (5.5.52) by the
symplectic transformation
x
j → (σPj /σQj )1/2x j = (ωj /ℏ)1/2x j,
yj → (σQj /σPj )1/2 yj = (ℏ/ωj )1/2 yj,
to which corresponds the canonical transformation
P′
j = (ℏ/ωj)1/2 Pj , Q′
j = (ωj/ℏ)1/2 Q j.
Then the characteristic function Tr S exp i[∑
j(P′
j x j + Q′
j yj)] will have
the form (5.5.52) with aj = σPj σQj = N j + 1
2 . In general the transfor-
mation can be much more complicated.
The fact that the characteristic function (5.5.49) can be always decom-
posed into the factors corresponding to mutually commuting pairs of the
canonical observables{P
′
j , Q′
j} means that the spaceH of the irreducible
representation z→ V(z) can be represented as the tensor product
H =
⨂
j
H′
j, (5.5.53)

212 Alexander Holevo
so that V(z) = ⨂
j Vj (z j, yj ) with Vj(x j, yj ) = exp i(P′
j x j + Q′
j yj)
acting irreducibly in H′
j ; moreover
Sm
⨂
j
S′
j,
where S′
j are the Gaussian states in H′
j with characteristic functions of
the simplest form
exp
[
i(P
′
j x j + Q
′
j yj)− aj
2 (x2
j + y2
j )
]
.
We emphasize again that the decomposition (5.5.53) is de/g192ned by the
Gaussian state itself (more de/g192nitely, by its correlation function) and need
not be the same as the “natural” decomposition related to initial canonical
observables.
Finally let us calculate the eigenvalues ofS
m. Since the transformation
(5.5.50) does not alter the eigenvalues of S we can take m(z) ≡ 0. By
(5.1.4) the zero-mean density operator S′
j for the jth degree of freedom
has the eigenvalues
1
N j + 1
⎫
N j
N j + 1
⎬n
; n= 0, 1,..., (5.5.54)
where N j = σPj σQj − 1
2 = aj − 1
2 . The tensor product of such states
will have for eigenvalues the numbers
s∏
j=1
1
N j + 1
⎫
N j
N j + 1
⎬n j
;
corresponding to all combinations ofn j = 0, 1,... In particular the max-
imal eigenvalue is equal to
s∏
j=1
1
N j + 1
=
s∏
j=1
1
aj + 1
2
.
The state is pure if and only if this value is equal to 1. Since aj ≥ 1
2 , this
can hold only if all aj = 1
2 or
det 1
2 D = 1.

213 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
5.6. AcharacteristicpropertyofGaussianstates
Let z → V(z) be an irreducible representation of the CCR in H and S
be a state in H. Consider the Hilbert space L 2(S) associated with the
state S.
Lemma5.6.1. The linear span of the operators {V(z), z ∈ Z} is dense
in L 2(S).
Proof. Let X∈ L 2(S) satisfy
⟨V(z), X⟩S = 0, z∈ Z. (5.6.55)
Since L 2(S) is the complexi/g192cation ofL 2
h(S), then X= X1+ iX2 with
X j ∈ L 2
h(S). Therefore we can use (2.8.88) to obtain
Tr(X◦ S)V(z)= 0, z∈ Z.
Thus Fz[X◦ S]=0; and by the inversion formula X◦ S= 0. Therefore
using again (2.8.88) we obtain for any bounded Y
⟨Y, X⟩S = Tr Y∗(S◦ X)= 0
so that X= 0i n L 2(S) and the lemma is proved.
Assume now that the state S has /g192nite second moments so thatR(z)∈
L 2
h(S) for all z∈ Z. Denote by R the subspace of L 2
h(S) generated by
the operators
c+ R(z); c∈ R, z∈ Z.
If R0 is the one-dimensional subspace of R consisting of multiples of the
unit operator, then R= R0⊕ R1 where R1 is the subspace of operators
R(z)− m(z), z∈ Z,
where m(z) is the mean of the state S. This follows from the fact that
⟨R(z)− m(z), I⟩S = m(z)− m(z)≡ 0.
By (5.4.37)
z→ R(z)− m(z) (5.6.56)
is an isometric map of the Euclidean space (Z,α) onto the subspace
R1 ⊂ L 2
h(S). Consider the commutation operator D of S de/g192ned
by (2.10.113) and denote by D1 its restriction onto the subspace R1,s o
that
[Y, X]S =⟨Y, D1 X⟩S; X, Y ∈ R1.

214 Alexander Holevo
Now let D be the operator de/g192ned through the correlation functionα of
the state according to (5.2.15). Then the relation (5.4.40) can be written
in the form
α(z,
D z′)=⟨R(z)− m(z), D(R(z′)− m(z′))⟩S; z, z′∈ Z.
This means that the operator D corresponds to D1 under the isometric
map (5.6.56), i.e.,
R(D z)− m(D z)= D1(R(z)− m(z)). (5.6.57)
Theorem5.6.2. A state S with /g192nite second moments is Gaussian if and
only if R (or R1) is an invariant subspace of the commutation opera-
tor D.
Proof. Observing that D(R0)=[ 0] by (2.10.115) we see that invariance
of R1 is equivalent to invariance of R.
Let S be a Gaussian state. We shall show that D= D1 on R1 and thus
R1 is an invariant subspace of D. Taking into account (5.6.57) we have
to show that
D(R(z)− m(z))= R(D z)− m(D z), z∈ Z. (5.6.58)
By the de/g192nition of commutation operator and the fact thatDI = 0 this
is equivalent to the identity
[X, R(z)]S =⟨X, R(D z)− m(D z)⟩S, X∈ L 2(S). (5.6.59)
By Lemma 5.5.1 we need to check this only for X = V(−w), w ∈ Z.
But (5.4.44) with (2.8.90) implies
[V(−w), R(z)]S = i/Delta1(w,z)Fw[S],
and (5.4.43) with (2.8.88) implies
⟨V(−w), R(z)⟩S =− i∇z Fw[S].
We thus need to check that the characteristic function of a Gaussian state
Fw[S] given by (5.5.49) satis/g192es
i/Delta1(w,z)Fw[S]=−[ i∇D z + m(D z)]Fw[S], (5.6.60)
and this is con/g192rmed by a straightforward computation.

215 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
To prove the converse assume that D(R1) ⊂ R1. Then D(R(z)−
m(z))= R(D1z)− m(D1z) where D1 is a linear operator in Z. Denoting
by α the correlation function of the state S we have
α(z, D1w)=⟨R(z)− m(z), D(R(w)− m(w))⟩S
=[ R(z)− m(z), R(w)− m(w)]S = /Delta1(z,w) ,
so that D1 = D where D is de/g192ned by (5.2.15). Thus (5.6.58) holds and
therefore the characteristic function of the state S satis/g192es the differential
equation (5.6.60). Since D is nondegenerate we can substitute D−1z for
z in (5.6.60) to obtain
−α(w, z)Fw[S]=[∇ z − im(z)]Fw[S]. (5.6.61)
Let{z j} be an orthonormal basis in the Euclidean space(Z,α) and wj
be the components of the vectorw in this basis. Then the coordinate form
of (5.6.61) reads
[∂
∂w j
− im(z j )
]
Fw[S]=− wj Fw[S], j= 1,...,2s .
The unique solution of this equation satisfying F0[S]=1i s
exp
[
i
∑
j
wj m(z j )− 1
2
∑
j
w2
j
]
= exp
[
im(w)− 1
2α(w,w)
]
.
The theorem is proved.
Consider the relation (5.6.59) for bounded X. Then using (2.8.88) and
(2.8.90) we obtain a useful identity
i[R(z), Sm]=( R(D z)− m(D z))◦ Sm (5.6.62)
for the density operator of Gaussian state with meanm(z) and correlation
function α(z, z′)= /Delta1(z, D−1z′).
Let{Sθ} be the family of Gaussian states with the /g192xed correlation
function α and the mean value of the form
m(z)=
n∑
j=1
θj m j(z),
where θ=[ θ1,...,θ n]∈R n, and m j(z) are /g192xed linear functionals on
Z. Introduce m j ∈ Z de/g192ned by the Riesz-Frechet lemma according to
m j (z)= α(m j , z), z∈ Z.

216 Alexander Holevo
Proposition5.6.3. The family {Sθ} is differentiable2 as a function of θ
with values in the Banach space T1(H ) of trace-class operators and
∂ Sθ
∂θ j
= i[R(D−1m j), Sθ]=( R(m j )− m(m j ))◦ Sθ . (5.6.63)
Proof. Using (5.5.50) we can write
Sθ = V
⎫ n∑
j=1
θj D−1m j
⎬
S0V
⎫ n∑
j=1
θj D−1m j
⎬∗
.
Giving an increment t to the parameter θj we get
Sθ+tδj = eitR (D−1m j ) Sθe−itR (D−1m j ),
where δj is the vector with the jth component being the unit, the others
being zero. Thus putting St = Sθ+tδ j we obtain the one-parameter family
{St; t∈ R} of the form (3.2.7), the in/g192nitesimal generatorR(D−1m j ) of
the corresponding unitary group{exp itR (D−1m j); t ∈ R} belonging to
L 2
h(S). Therefore the family {St} satis/g192es the conditions of Proposition
6.3.1 which will be proved in the next chapter. This implies the differen-
tiability of{S
t} and the expression (6.3.19) for the derivative which gives
the /g192rst equality in (5.6.63). The second follows from (5.6.62).
Let us illustrate these results by applying them to the quasi-classical
Gaussian state (5.5.46) with the characteristic function (5.5.47), the role
of the parameters[θ
j] being played by P, Q. Then z is two-dimensional
vector with components x, y so that
/Delta1(z, z′)= xy′− x′y.
The mean value and the correlation function are
m(z)= Px + Qy ,α ( z, z)= σ 2
P x2+ σ 2
Q y2,
whence m(z)= Pα(mP, z)+ Qα(mQ, z) with
m P = σ−2
P [1, 0], mQ = σ−1
Q [0, 1].
2 By differentiability of a function with values in a Banach space we always mean strong (i.e., norm)
differentiability.

217 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Therefore
R(mP)− m(mP)= σ−2
P (P− P),
R(mQ)− m(mQ)= σ−2
Q (Q− Q).
Moreover
D =
[0 −σ−2
Q
σ−2
P 0
]
,
and the relations (5.6.63) become
∂ SP,Q
∂ P
= i[Q, SP,Q]=σ −2
P (P− P)◦ SP,Q,
∂ SP,Q
∂ Q
=− i[P, SP,Q]=σ −2
Q (Q− Q)◦ SP,Q.
(5.6.64)
Since R(z)= Px + Qy , the relation (5.6.58) is equivalent to
D(P)=− σ−2
Q (Q− Q), D(Q)= σ−2
P (P− P). (5.6.65)
5.7. Comments
Section 5.1. The relation (5.1.2) gives the so called Glauber’s P-rep-
resentation [42] (see also Klauder and Sudarshan [76]). Quantization of
the electromagnetic /g192eld,i.e., representation of the /g192eld by an in/g192nite
collection of quantum oscillators is due to Dirac [30]; it is presented in
Louisell [88], Klauder and Sudarshan [76] and Helstrom [53] in the form
convenient for applications in quantum optics. There one can /g192nd also a
discussion of states of the radiation /g192eld.
Section 5.2. The coordinate-free approach to the CCR was developed
by Segal [127] (for a /g192nite number of degrees of freedom see Castler
[21]). For symplectic spaces and skew-symmetric forms see,e.g., Maltzev
[94].
Section 5.3. The Stone-von Neumann uniqueness theorem is essentially
/g192nite-dimensional: it does not hold for an in/g192nite number of degrees of
freedom (see, e.g., Segal [127]). To this fact are related some of the “di-
vergences” of the quantum /g192eld theory. A thorough consideration of the
problems of this theory can be found in Wightman [143] and Bogoljubov,
Logunov and Todorov [16]. The Weyl transform introduced in [141] was
studied by Loupias and Miracle-Sole [89], Pool [114] and Holevo [55]
among others. The Weyl transform reveals most distinctly both similar-
ity and disparateness between quantum and classical mechanics (see,e.g.,
Shirokov [125]).

218 Alexander Holevo
Section 5.4. The characteristic function of a state was introduced for
quantum /g192elds by Segal [126] who generalized a particular construction
of Moyal [99].
The fact that the characteristic function determines the density opera-
tor uniquely underlies the method of homodyne tomography in quantum
optics [184]. In the case of one mode
TrSe
i(Px+Qy) = TrSeirR (φ) =
∫
eirt pφ(t)dt,
where R(φ) = P sin φ+ Q cos φ is the so called /g192eld quadrature cor-
responding to the phase φ. For each /g192xed value ofφ measurement of
the quadrature R(φ) can be accomplished via optical homodyning: the
/g192eld of the mode with given frequency is combined with intense refer-
ence /g192eld (so called local oscillator) from the auxiliary laser of the same
frequency by means of a balanced 50:50 beam splitter and then the differ-
ence of the intensities of the outgoing /g192elds is measured. In the limit of
in/g192nite intensity this difference turns out to be proportional to the quadra-
ture R(φ) [200]. The value of φ is determined by the parameters of the
local oscillator. Knowledge of the probability densities p
φ(t) for all val-
ues φ ∈[ 0,π] is equivalent to knowledge of the characteristic function
of the state and hence, of the density operator ( pφ(t) is just the Radon
transform of the Wigner function of the state which explains the use of
the term “tomography”). Corresponding transformations can be obtained
from the inversion formulas, see [161]. By making measurements of the
distribution of quadratures for suf/g192ciently many values ofφ one can ob-
tain consistent estimates of the density operator. Let us stress that in this
case one deals with measurements of the incompatible observables R(φ)
performed on different subensembles of the whole statistical ensemble.
For consideration of the mathematical aspects of this problem as a non-
parametric inverse statistical problem see [166].
Section 5.5. The general de/g192nition of the Gaussian state (for a /g192eld)
was given by Manuceau and Verbeure [97] under the name of quasi-
free states, though particular Gaussian states appeared earlier in various
sources (see, e.g., Glauber [42] and Louisell [88]). There is a noncom-
mutative central limit theorem (Cushen and Hudson [24]) in which the
Gaussian states appear as limit law.
For a proof of the Schur’s result see, e.g., Polya and Szeg ¨o [112, Sec-
tion VII, Problem 36].
Section 5.6. The characteristic property of Gaussian states was estab-
lished by Holevo [65].

Chapter 6
Unbiased measurements
6.1. Quantumcommunicationchannel
Consider the idealized scheme of information transmission presented at
Figure 6.1. In the absence of signal the physical carrier of information
C
(say, electromagnetic /g192eld) is in a stateS. Usually it is adopted that S is
the equilibrium (Gibbs) state at the given temperature. Transmission of a
signal is accomplished through an in/g193uence of the communication source
S onto the system C, which forces a de/g192nite change in its state. If there
are parameters of the source S which can be varied, then the resulting
state Sθ will depend on the values of these parameters θ.
Figure6.1.
If the information carrier is described classically, then its states are
probability distributions Pθ (dω) on the phase space /Omega1of the system
C. Such information channels are considered in the classical informa-
tion theory. On the other hand if the information carrier is a quantum-
mechanical system, then its states are described by density operators S
θ
in the corresponding Hilbert space and one speaks of a quantum com-
munication channel. The advent of coherent light sources such as laser
opened a possibility for the creation of communication systems working
in the optical range of frequencies. While for the radio frequencies the
“energy quantum” ℏω is quite small as compared to the mean energy of
the thermal /g193uctuationskT and the radiation /g192eld can be described classi-
cally, at the optical frequencies quantum /g193uctuations become signi/g192cant
and a consistent description of the information carrier – the radiation /g192eld


220 Alexander Holevo
– requires quantum theory. Assuming the simpli/g192ed picture of the /g192eld
as a /g192nite collection of quantum oscillators (which is usually justi/g192ed
here) we see that in the absence of signal the /g192eld is described by the
quasiclassical Gaussian state (5.1.7) with zero mean, and the in/g193uence of
the source is re/g193ected by the appearance of non-zero mean¯a which plays
the role of the transmitted signal. This is the quantum analog of the con-
ventional information-theoretic model of the signal distorted by additive
Gaussian noise.
The /g192nal element of the communication system is receiver
R destined
for obtaining an estimateˆθ of the actual valueθ of the transmitted signal,
basing on observations over the system C. Abstracting from details of
realization of the estimation procedure, we can say that the receiver per-
forms a measurement of the parameter θ in the family of states{S
θ}.O f
principal importance are the problems of optimal reception of the signal
and the theoretical bounds to accuracy of measurements.
In Chapter 4 we have considered this kind of problems for measure-
ments of kinematical parameters of quantum states, using Bayes’ and
minimax approaches. Here we develop a different approach which is
based on the notion of unbiasedness. This approach does not assume ex-
istence and knowledge of the prior distribution and is applicable to an
arbitrary family of states without any symmetry. The most complete re-
sults are obtained in this way for Gaussian states.
Let{S
θ} be a family of quantum states where the parameter
θ=[ θ1,...,θ n]
runs over a domain /Theta1⊂ Rn, and M(dnθ), with d nθ = dθ1 ...dθ n be a
measurement with values in /Theta1. Throughout this section we shall assume
that the second moments are /g192nite:
∫
ˆθ2
j μθ (dnˆθ) <∞; j= 1,...,n , (6.1.1)
where μθ is the measurement probability distribution with respect to the
state Sθ:
μθ(B)= Tr Sθ M(B), B∈ A (/Theta1).
The measurement is called unbiased if
∫
ˆθjμθ(dnˆθ)= θj; j= 1,...,n , (6.1.2)
for all θ ∈ /Theta1. This means that there is no systematic deviation in the
results of the measurement. Differentiating this equation formally we

221 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
obtain ∫
ˆθj
∂μθ
∂θk
(dnˆθ)= δjk; j, k= 1,...,n . (6.1.3)
The precise meaning of this relation will be established later. What we
shall need in the most part of this section is the set of conditions (6.1.1)-
(6.1.3) satis/g192ed at a /g192xed point
θ ∈ /Theta1. We shall refer to it aslocal
unbiasedness at the point θ.
For the deviation function we shall use a quadratic form
Wθ(ˆθ)=
∑
j,k
gjk (θj −ˆθj )(θk −ˆθk),
where G =[ gjk] is a real nondegenerate positive de/g192niteweight ma-
trix. The accuracy of an unbiased measurement M ={ M(dnθ)} is then
described by the total mean-square deviation
Σθ{M}=
∫
Wθ(ˆθ)μθ(dnˆθ).
For one-dimensional parameter, G is a positive number and Σθ{M}=
GDθ{M} where Dθ{M} is the variance of M with respect to the state Sθ .
In the general case, introducing the covariance matrix of the unbiased
measurement
B
θ{M}=
[∫
(ˆθj − θj)(ˆθk − θk)μθ (dnˆθ)
]
≡[ bjk{M}], (6.1.4)
we have
Σθ{M}=Tr GBθ{M}=
∑
j,k
gjk bjk{M},
whereTr denotes the trace of an (n× n)-matrix. Thus for n > 1 the
weight matrix enters essentially in the mean deviation.
If the measurement minimizes Σθ{M} it is called the best (unbiased
or locally unbiased ) measurement of the parameter θ. If there exists a
measurement minimizing Σθ{M} simultaneously for allθ∈ Θ it is called
the uniformly best. In this chapter we shall obtain some general lower
bounds for the mean-square deviation and apply them to estimation of
the mean value of Gaussian states.
6.2. Alowerboundforthevarianceinone-dimensionalcase
Let{Sθ} be a family of states parametrized by a one-dimensional param-
eter θ. The bound which will be established here is a noncommutative
analog of the well-known Cram´er-Rao inequality in mathematical statis-
tics.

222 Alexander Holevo
Concerning the family{Sθ} we assume:
(1) the family{Sθ} is differentiable as a function of θ with values in the
Banach space of trace-class operators.
Using this condition we can write for any bounded X
d
dθ Eθ (X)= Tr d
dθ Sθ · X, (6.2.5)
where (d/dθ) Sθ is the derivative of the family. The possibility of in-
terchanging the differentiation and the trace follows from the inequality
(2.7.72) as generalized in Theorem 2.7.2. We further assume:
(2) the linear functional of X de/g192ned by(6.2.5) can be extended to a
linear continuous functional on the Hilbert space
L 2
h(Sθ ); that is
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐Tr d
dθ Sθ · X
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
≤ c Tr Sθ X2, X∈ Bh(H ),
where c is a constant.
By the Riesz-Frechet lemma there isLθ∈ L 2
h(Sθ) such that Tr(d/dθ) Sθ·
X=⟨Lθ , X⟩θ for all bounded X, where⟨·,·⟩θ ≡⟨·,·⟩Sθ . By (2.8.88) this
is equivalent to
d
dθ Sθ = Sθ ◦ Lθ ≡ 1
2(Sθ Lθ + Lθ Sθ ). (6.2.6)
An operator Lθ ∈ L 2
h(Sθ ) satisfying (6.2.6) is called the symmetric log-
arithmic derivative of the family {Sθ} at the point θ. For future use we
note that
⟨I, Lθ⟩θ = Eθ (Lθ )= d
dθ Eθ (I)= 0. (6.2.7)
Consider a measurement M(dθ) with the probability distribution
μθ(dˆθ) = Tr Sθ M(dˆθ). As we have agreed in Section 6.1 we assume
that it has /g192nite second moment; moreover we assume that
d
dθ
∫
ˆθμθ (dˆθ)=
∫
ˆθ dμθ
dθ (dˆθ), (6.2.8)
where dμθ/dθ is the real σ -additive set function (of /g192nite total variation)
de/g192ned by the relation
dμθ
dθ (B)= Tr d
dθ Sθ M(B), B∈ A (/Theta1).

223 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Proposition6.2.1. Let the family {Sθ} satisfy the condition (1) and (2)
and a measurement M={ M(dˆθ)} satisfy (6.2.8) at a point θ. Then
Dθ{M}Dθ (Lθ )≥
[d
dθ Eθ{M}
]2
. (6.2.9)
Proof. From (6.2.5) and the de/g192nition ofLθ
d
dθ Eθ (X)=⟨Lθ , X⟩θ
for all bounded X. We /g192rst extend this relation to measurementsM =
{M(dθ)} with /g192nite second moments. PuttingX= M(B) we get
dμθ
dθ (B)=⟨Lθ , M(B)⟩θ . (6.2.10)
Consider the operator
XM =
∫
ˆθ M(dˆθ)∈ L 2
h(Sθ ),
de/g192ned as in Section 2.8. Since the integral is the limit inL 2
h(Sθ ) of /g192nite
integral sums, then from (6.2.10)
⟨XM, Lθ⟩θ =
⟨∫
ˆθ M(dˆθ), Lθ
⟩
θ
=
∫
ˆθ⟨M(dˆθ), Lθ⟩θ =
∫
ˆθ dμθ
dθ (dˆθ).
(6.2.11)
Using (6.2.8) we get
⟨Lθ , XM⟩θ = d
dθ Eθ{M}. (6.2.12)
Now by (2.9.106)
Dθ{M}≥⟨XM − Eθ{M}, XM − Eθ{M}⟩θ.
Using the Cauchy inequality and (6.2.7) we get
⟨XM − Eθ{M}, XM − Eθ{M}⟩θ ·⟨Lθ , Lθ⟩θ
≥⟨XM − Eθ{M}, Lθ⟩2
θ
=⟨XM, Lθ⟩2
θ
.
Substituting (6.2.12) we obtain the inequality (6.2.9).

224 Alexander Holevo
For an unbiased measurement M (6.2.9) gives
Dθ{M}≥ Dθ (Lθ)−1. (6.2.13)
The above proof shows that in fact all that is needed for (6.2.13) is the
relation (6.1.3) which takes the form
∫
ˆθ dμ
θ
dθ (dˆθ)= 1
or, due to (6.2.11)
⟨Lθ , XM⟩θ = 1. (6.2.14)
We thus have
Corollary6.2.2. The inequality (6.2.13) holds for any family {S
θ} sat-
isfying the conditions (1) and (2) and any measurement M ={ M(dˆθ)}
satisfying (6.2.14), in particular for measurements, locally unbiased at
the point θ.
The quantity Jθ = Dθ (Lθ ) appearing in the right-hand side of (6.2.13)
is the noncommutative analog of the Fisher information in mathematical
statistics. It is a measure of information about the parameter θ contained
in the family{S
θ}.
In what follows we shall directly use the conditions of the type (6.2.14)
which are both easy to check and relevant for the inequalities we need.
However for completeness we shall give a suf/g192cient condition for (6.2.8)
which allows to deduce local unbiasedness from unbiasedness by differ-
entiation.
Proposition6.2.3. Let the family{S
θ} satisfy the condition (1) in an in-
terval of values of θ and−T ≤ dSθ /dθ ≤ T , where T is a positive
trace-class operator. Let a measurement M ={ M(dˆθ)} be such that∫
|ˆθ|μ(dˆθ) < ∞ where μ(dˆθ) = Tr TM (dˆθ). Then (6.2.8) holds, for
any θ in the interval.
Proof. By the Lagrange formula for /g192nite increment
μθ+/Delta1θ(B)− μθ (B)
/Delta1θ = d
dθ μθ+h/Delta1θ(B)
= Tr d
dθ Sθ+h/Delta1θM(B), 0 < h < 1,
whence
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
μ
θ+/Delta1θ(B)− μθ (B)
/Delta1θ
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐≤ Tr TM (B)= μ(B), B∈
A (/Theta1),

225 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
and thus|d/dθμθ (B)|≤μ( B). Therefore the integral
∫ˆθ(dμθ /dθ)(dˆθ)
is well de/g192ned and converges. For a /g192nitec,
∫
|ˆθ|≤c
ˆθ dμθ
dθ (dˆθ)= Tr d
dθ
∫
|ˆθ|≤c
ˆθ M(dˆθ)
= d
dθ
∫
|ˆθ|≤c
ˆθμθ(dˆθ).
On the other hand⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
1
/Delta1θ
[∫
|ˆθ|>c
ˆθμθ+/Delta1θ(dˆθ)−
∫
|ˆθ|>c
ˆθμθ(dˆθ)
]
−
∫
|ˆθ|>c
ˆθ dμθ
dθ (dˆθ)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
≤ 2
∫
|ˆθ|>c
|ˆθ|μ(dθ).
Thus the left-hand side converges uniformly to zero as c →∞ which
implies (6.2.8).
Finally we shall apply the results of this section to estimation of pa-
rameter Q in the family of the quasiclassical Gaussian states (5.5.46)
(the parameter P is assumed to be /g192xed). By Proposition 5.6.3 this fam-
ily satis/g192es the conditions (1) and (2) with the symmetric logarithmic
derivative
L
Q = σ−1
Q (Q− Q)
found from the second of the relations (5.6.64). Therefore DQ(L Q) =
σ−2
Q and the inequality (6.2.13) gives
DQ{M}≥σ 2
Q = ℏ
ω
⎫
N+ 1
2
⎬
(6.2.15)
for any locally unbiased measurement of the parameter Q.
Apparently this bound is attained (for any value of Q) by the simple
measurement E(dQ) corresponding to the coordinate observable Q. Us-
ing Dirac’s notation we can write
E(dQ)=| Q)(Q|dQ, (6.2.16)
where|Q) are formal eigenvectors of the operatorQ. Since E(dQ) is the
spectral measure of Q, XE = Q and the condition (6.2.14) is satis/g192ed
since
⟨L Q, Q⟩Q = σ−2
Q ⟨Q− Q, Q⟩Q = σ−2
Q ⟨Q− Q, Q− Q⟩Q = 1.
Thus the canonical coordinate observable Q gives the uniformly best lo-
cally unbiased measurement of the coordinate parameter Q in the family
{SP,Q} of quasiclassical Gaussian states. Similar result holds for the mo-
mentum parameter P.

226 Alexander Holevo
6.3. Thecaseofshiftparameter
Here we shall prove the inequality
Dθ{M}Dθ (A)≥ 1
4
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dθ Eθ{M}
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
(6.3.17)
for the variance of measurements of the shift parameters θ in the family
Sθ = eiAθ Se−iAθ . (6.3.18)
This is generalization of the Mandelstam-Tamm inequality (3.2.9) which
is connected with uncertainty relations for shift parameters, and we wish
to compare it with the noncommutative Cram ´er-Rao inequality (6.2.9)
originating from analogies with mathematical statistics.
First we establish the condition ensuring the properties (1) and (2) of
Section 6.2 for the family (6.3.18).
Proposition6.3.1. Let the in/g192nitesimal generator A of the unitary group
{V
θ = exp iθ A; θ ∈ R} be square-summable with respect to the basic
state S. Then it is square-summable with respect to S θ , θ ∈ R. The
family{Sθ} satis/g192es the condition(1) and its derivative is given by
d
dθ Sθ = i[A, Sθ], (6.3.19)
where the commutator is de/g192ned as in Section2.8. Moreover{Sθ} satis-
/g192es condition(2) and its symmetric logarithmic derivative is equal to
Lθ = eiθ AD(A)e−iθ A,
where D is the commutation operator of the basic state S.
Proof. We /g192rst prove thatA ∈ L 2
h(S) implies A ∈ L 2
h(Sθ ). A si tw a s
observed before the formulation of Stone’s theorem in Section 2.4, ψ ∈
D (A) implies Vθ ψ ∈ D (A). Moreover since Vθ is a function of A,
AVθψ= Vθ Aψ. Therefore D (A)⊃ R(
√
S) implies
D (A)⊃ R (Vθ
√
SV∗
θ )= R (
√
Sθ )
and the operator A√Sθ = AVθ
√
SV∗
θ = Vθ A
√
SV∗
θ is Hilbert-Schmidt.
It remains to refer to Proposition 2.8.2.
Put now Sθ = Tθ Rθ , where Tθ = Vθ
√Sθ , Rθ = √Sθ V∗
θ . We shall
show that the families{Tθ},{Rθ} are differentiable as functions of θ with
values in the Hilbert space T2(H ), and
d
dθ Tθ = iATθ, dRθ
dθ =− iRθ A. (6.3.20)

227 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
We restrict to{Tθ} since consideration of{Rθ} is similar. We have




T
θ+/Delta1θ− Tθ
/Delta1θ − iATθ




2
=∥F/Delta1θ(A)ATθ∥2,
where the function
F/Delta1θ(x)= (/Delta1θ· x)−1(ei/Delta1θ·x − 1− i/Delta1θ· x)
has the properties
|F/Delta1θ(x)|≤const.;
lim
/Delta1θ→0
F/Delta1θ(x)= 0, x∈ R.
By using the spectral representation of F/Delta1θ(A) one can show that
∥F/Delta1θ(A)∥≤const.; (6.3.21)
lim
/Delta1θ→0
F/Delta1θ(A)ψ= 0,ψ ∈ H. (6.3.22)
Let us show now that ∥F/Delta1θ(A)ATθ∥2 → 0a s/Delta1θ→ 0. Since Q =
ATθ ∈ T2(H ), Q can be approximated by /g192nite-rank operators˜Q. From
(6.3.22) it follows that∥F/Delta1θ(A)˜Q∥2 → 0a s/Delta1θ→ 0. On the other hand
by the inequality (2.7.81)
∥F/Delta1θ(A)· (Q− ˜Q)∥2 ≤∥F/Delta1θ(A)∥·∥Q− ˜Q∥2,
which can be made arbitrarily small using (6.3.21). This proves the /g192rst
relation in (6.3.20).
The relation (6.3.19) now follows from the simple fact that if S
θ =
Tθ · Rθ where{Tθ},{Rθ} are differentiable as functions with values in
T2(H ), then{Sθ} is differentiable as function with values in T1(H ) and
d
dθ Sθ = dTθ
dθ Rθ + Tθ
dRθ
dθ .
In fact
Sθ+/Delta1θ− Sθ
/Delta1θ = Tθ+/Delta1θ− Tθ
/Delta1θ Rθ+/Delta1θ+ Tθ
Rθ+/Delta1θ− Rθ
/Delta1θ .
We have
(/Delta1θ)−1(Tθ+/Delta1θ− Tθ )→ dTθ
dθ , (/Delta1θ)−1(Rθ+/Delta1θ− Rθ)→ dRθ
dθ

228 Alexander Holevo
in T2(H ): the family {Rθ}, being differentiable, is continuous so that
Rθ+/Delta1θ→ Rθ in T2(H ). Passing to the limit as /Delta1θ→ 0 and us-
ing (2.7.80) we see that {Sθ} satis/g192es condition (1) and the expression
(6.3.19) for dSθ /dθ follows.
Consider the expectation Eθ (X) of bounded observable X. Using
(6.2.5), (6.3.19) and (2.8.90) we obtain
d
dθ Eθ (X)=[ X, A]θ , (6.3.23)
where[·,·]θ ≡[· ,·]Sθ . It follows that the family {Sθ} satis/g192es condition
(2) of Section 6.2 since
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐Tr dS
θ
dθ X
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
=|[ A, X]θ|2 ≤ 4⟨A, A⟩θ⟨X, X⟩θ
by the inequality (4) of Proposition 2.8.3.
Comparing (6.2.6) and (6.3.19) we get
Sθ ◦ Lθ = i[A, Sθ], (6.3.24)
or, which is the same
⟨X, Lθ⟩θ =[ X, A]θ
for all X ∈ L 2
h(Sθ ). By the de/g192nition (2.10.113) of the commutation
operator this means that
Lθ = Dθ (A), (6.3.25)
where Dθ is the commutation operator of Sθ . From (6.3.24) and (6.3.18)
S◦ (e−iθ A Lθ eiθ A)= i[A, S],
whence Dθ(A) = eiθ AD(A)e−iθ A and we get the desired relation for
Lθ .
Proposition6.3.2. Under the condition of Proposition6.3.1 the inequal-
ity (6.3.17) holds for any measurement M={ M(dθ)} with /g192nite second
moment satisfying (6.2.8).
Proof. Putting X= M(B) in (6.3.23) we get
d
dθ μθ (B)=[ M(B), A]θ , B∈ A (/Theta1).
Then we can extend (6.3.23) onto measurements M satisfying the condi-
tions of the proposition:
d
dθ Eθ{M}=[ XM, A]θ . (6.3.26)

229 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Indeed by (6.2.8)
d
dθ Eθ{M}=
∫
ˆθ dμθ
dθ (dˆθ).
Arguing as in the proof of Proposition 6.2.1 we get
∫
ˆθ dμθ
dθ (dˆθ)=
∫
ˆθ[M(dˆθ), A]θ =[ XM, A]θ,
as required. Combining (2.9.104) with (2.9.106) we get
Dθ{M}Dθ (A)≥ 1
4[XM, A]2
θ
.
Substituting (6.3.26) into the right-hand side of this inequality we get
(6.3.17).
If M is locally unbiased, then (6.3.17) takes the form
Dθ{M}≥[ 4Dθ (A)]−1. (6.3.27)
This generalizes the uncertainty relation for covariant measurements of
the shift parameter displayed in Section 4.7. Thus under the condition of
Proposition 6.3.1 there are two different bounds for the variance of a lo-
cally unbiased measurement M of the shift parameter θ: the “uncertainty
relation” (6.3.27) and the “Cram´er-Rao inequality” (6.2.13).
We shall show that the last inequality is in general more informative
(i.e., provides a greater lower bound ) than (6.3.27) and that the two
bounds coincide in the case of pure state family {S
θ}. First of all we
remark that both bounds in fact do not depend on θ. While this is clear
for (6.3.27), for (6.2.13) this follows from the expression forLθ obtained
in Proposition 6.3.1 and (6.3.18). Therefore we can assumeθ= 0. Using
(6.3.25), (6.2.7) and (2.10.115) we get
1
4 Ds(L0)= 1
4⟨D(A), D(A)⟩S
= 1
4⟨D(A− A), D(A− A)⟩S =− 1
4⟨(A− A), D2(A− A)⟩S,
where A= ES(A). Since 1+ 1
4 D2 ≥ 0,
1
4 DS(L0)≤⟨A− A, A− A⟩S = DS(A),
which proves that (6.2.13) is at least as good as (6.3.27). The equality
holds if an only if ⎫
I+ 1
4 D2
⎬
(A− A)= 0. (6.3.28)

230 Alexander Holevo
To explain the meaning of this condition consider the matrix representa-
tion of the operator A∈
L 2(S), as described by (2.10.110). According
to the last relation in (2.10.118) the operator I + 1
4 D2 acts multiplying
the matrix element in the jth row and the kth column by 4sj sk(sj + sk)−1,
where{sj} are the eigenvalues of S. Therefore (I+ 1
4 D2)X = 0i fa n d
only if SXS = 0, so that (6.3.28) is equivalent to
SAS = A· S2.
This is apparently satis/g192ed ifS is a pure state.
Let us return to the example considered at the end of Section 6.2. Ac-
cording to the results of Section 5.6 the Gaussian states{SP,Q} satisfy
SP,Q = e−iQP SeiQP ,
where S= SP,0. Applying (6.3.27) with A=− P we get only
D Q{M}≥(2σ P)−2,
as compared to the bound σ 2
Q of (6.2.15). By the Heisenberg uncertainty
relation σ 2
Q ≥ (2σP)−2 and the equality holds only for the pure minimum-
uncertainty state.
Being less informative, the bound (6.3.27) may still be useful since
it is expressed strictly in terms of the in/g192nitesimal operatorA and does
not require knowledge of the symmetric logarithmic derivative. But if
the latter is available, as in the Gaussian case, then the more informative
bound (6.2.13) should be used.
Although (6.3.17) applies as well to the angular parameter ϕ in the
family{S
ϕ} de/g192ned by (4.6.36), it is not the inequality which should be
used in this case. As we have already seen in Section 4.5 the variance
Dϕ{M} need to be replaced by the uncertainty de/g192ned by (6.5.45). More-
over the unbiasedness condition must be also modi/g192ed. One easily sees
that a covariant measurement M ={ M(dϕ)} of an angular quantity is
necessarily biased. To /g192nd the substitute for the unbiasedness condition
we introduce the bounded operator
U
M =
∫2π
0
eiϕ M(dϕ).
Then denoting Eϕ(U)= Tr SϕU we have
Eϕ(UM)= eiϕ E0(UM),

231 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
as a consequence of the covariance property of M. It follows that
i−1 d
dϕ ln Eϕ(UM)= 1. (6.3.29)
This replaces the local unbiasedness property in the angular case.
We now prove the inequality
/Delta1ϕ{M}· Dϕ(A)≥ 1
4
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
d
dϕ ln Eϕ(UM)
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
(6.3.30)
under the same assumption of square-summability of the operator A in
the family (4.6.36), for any measurement M={ M(dϕ)}.
From (6.3.23), (d/dϕ)Eϕ(UM)=[ A, UM]ϕ, so that
d
dϕ ln Eϕ(UM)=[ A, UM]ϕ Eϕ(UM)−1.
Using (2.8.99) we get
1
4|[A, UM]ϕ|2 ≤⟨A− A, A− A⟩ϕ⟨UM − U M, UM − U M⟩ϕ,
where A= Eϕ(A) etc. Applying (2.9.109):
⟨UM − U M, UM − U M⟩ϕ ≤
∫
|eiˆϕ − U M|2μϕ(dˆϕ)
≡ /Delta1ϕ{M}·| Eϕ(UM)|2.
Summing up we arrive to (6.3.30).
If now the measurement M satis/g192es (6.3.29) (in particular ifM is co-
variant), then we obtain the modi/g192cation of (6.3.27) to the angular pa-
rameter
/Delta1
ϕ{M}≥[ 4Dϕ(A)]−1.
Arguing as in Section 6.2 we can improve this bound to
/Delta1ϕ{M}≥ Dϕ(Lϕ)−1
where Lϕ is the symmetric logarithmic derivative of the family (4.6.36).

232 Alexander Holevo
6.4. Estimationofforcebymeasurementsoveratrialobject
Consider a quantum object of mass m under the action of constant force
F. Since the potential energy is equal to V(x)=− Fx the Hamiltonian
of the object is
H= 1
ℏ
⎫ p2
2m − Fq
⎬
.
Writing the dynamical equation (3.7.69) in the momentum representation
(3.4.38) we get
i∂˜ψ
t(η)
∂t =− η2 ˜ψt(η)
2mℏ − iF ∂˜ψt(η)
∂η .
This is a linear /g192rst order partial differential equation and its solution is
easily found to be
˜ψ
t(η)≡ Vt ˜ψ0(η)= ˜ψ0(η− Ft )
· exp
⎫
− iη2t
2mℏ+ iηFt 2
2mℏ − iF2t3
6mℏ
⎬
.
Using the relation (3.4.39) we can write the operator of time evolution
Vt = exp[−(it/ℏ)(p2/2m− Fq)] in the form
Vt = WFt 2/2m,Ft /m V 0
t · exp
⎫iF2t3
12mℏ
⎬
. (6.4.31)
Here
WFt 2/2m,Ft /m = exp i
ℏ
⎫
Ftq − Ft 2
2m p
⎬
(6.4.32)
is the displacement operator corresponding to the kinematical transfor-
mation
(x,v) →
⎫
x+ Ft
2
2m ,v + Ft
m
⎬
;
V 0
t = exp(−ip2/2mℏ) is the operator of free evolution and the last expo-
nent is an inessential scalar factor of unit modulus.
The relation (6.4.31) has simple physical meaning. In classical me-
chanics the motion in the /g192eld of constant forceF is described by the
relations
p(t)= p+ Ft , q(t)= q+ p
m t+ Ft 2
2m . (6.4.33)

233 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
The transformation (p, q)→ (p(t), q(t)) can be composed of the kine-
matical displacement (p, q)→ (p+ Ft , q+ Ft 2/2m) and the free evolu-
tion (p, q)→ (p, q+(p/m)t). The relation (6.4.31) is the quantum ana-
log of this fact expressed in the Schr ¨odinger picture. Introducing time-
dependent observables p(t) = V∗
t pVt , q(t) = V∗
t qVt one can derive
from (6.4.31) the quantum relations (6.4.33) in the Heisenberg picture.
Summing up, we can say that if the object prepared initially in the
state S, was exposed to the action of force F during the time t, then the
resulting state will be
Vt St V∗
t = WFt 2/2m,Ft /m S0
t W∗
Ft 2/2m,Ft /m,
where S0
t = V 0
t S(V 0
t )∗ is the basic state which would result if the force
were absent. Denoting the resulting state by SF and using (6.4.32) we
can write
SF = eiFA S0
t e−iFA , (6.4.34)
where
A= t
ℏ
⎫
q− p
2m t
⎬
. (6.4.35)
We now turn to the question – what is the extremal accuracy with
which the value of F can be estimated by quantum measurements after
the time t. The foregoing discussion reduces this question to estimation
of the shift parameter F in the family (6.4.34), so that we can apply the
results of Section 6.3.
If the operator (6.4.35) has /g192nite second moment with respect toS0
t ,
then the variance of any locally unbiased measurement M of the force
F satis/g192es (6.3.27). Let us express the quantityDF(A) which enters
into (6.3.27) through the variances corresponding to the initial state S.
Passage from Schr¨odinger to Heisenberg picture gives
DF(A)≡ DS0
t
(A)= t2
ℏ2 DS
⎫
q0(t)− p0(t)
2m t
⎬
, (6.4.36)
where q0(t) = (V 0
t )∗qV 0
t , p0(t) = (V 0
t )∗ pV 0
t are the time-dependent
canonical observables for the free motion. From (3.7.66) and (3.7.65)
p0(t)= p, q0(t)= q+ p
m t. (6.4.37)
Substituting it into (6.4.36) we obtain the inequality for the variance of a
locally unbiased measurement M of the force F
DF{M}≥ ℏ2
4t2 DS
⎫
q+ p
2m t
⎬, (6.4.38)

234 Alexander Holevo
which holds under the assumption that p and q have /g192nite second mo-
ments with respect to the initial state S.
Assuming further that q and p are uncorrelated, i.e.,
⟨q− E
S(q), p− ES(p)⟩S = 0 (6.4.39)
for the initial state S we get from (6.4.38)
DF{M}≥ ℏ2
4t2
[
DS(q)+ t2
4m2 DS(p)
]−1
. (6.4.40)
By the Heisenberg uncertainty relation, the right-hand side can not ex-
ceed the value ℏm/2t
3 which is achieved for DS(p)= ℏm/t, Ds(q)=
ℏt/4m. Thus under the most unfavorable conditions the bound becomes
DF{M}≥ ℏm
2t3 (6.4.41)
However if the initial state is properly prepared, the extremal quantum
accuracy of the force measurements can be made arbitrarily high for a
/g192xedt. To show this we introduce the observables of the form
B= α 2mq
t2 + β p
t ,α + β= 1,
which are canonically conjugate in the sense of Section 3.2 to A as fol-
lows easily from the expressions for A and B, which are just linear com-
binations of p and q, and from the CCR. Then as it was shown in Section
3.2, B corresponds to a covariant measurement of parameterF and there-
fore it is up to a constant an unbiased estimate of F. A strictly unbiased
estimate is obtained by subtracting from p and q their basic mean values
which according to (6.4.37) are
ES0
t
(p)= ES(p), ES0
t
(q)= ES(q)+ t
m ES(p).
Using (6.4.37) and (6.4.39) we obtain the variance of B, which is the
same for all values of F
DS0
t
(B)= DS
⎫
α· 2m
⎫
q+ t
m p
⎬
t−1+ βpt−1
⎬
= 4m2
t4 DS(q)α2+ 1
t2 DS(p)(2α+ β)2.
The minimum of this quantity under the restrictionα+β= 1 is achieved
for
α=− DS(p)
[4m2
t2 DS(q)+ DS(p)
]−1

235 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
which corresponds to the unbiased estimate1
B∗ = t−1
[
DS(p)−1+ t2
4m2 DS(q)−1
]−1
·
⎡
⎢
⎣ p− E
S(p)
DS(p) − t
2m
q− p
m t− ES(q)
DS(q)
⎤
⎥
⎦ ,
(6.4.42)
having the variance
D
S0
t
(B∗)= t−2
[
DS(p)−1 + t2
4m2 DS(q)−1
]−1
= DS(q)· DS(p)
t2
[
DS(q)+ t2
4m2 DS(q)
]. (6.4.43)
As it should be expected this quantity satis/g192es (6.4.40); moreover the
equality is achieved if the initial state S is a minimum-uncertainty state.
The variance of the estimate B
∗ tends to zero if either DS(p) or DS(q)
tends to zero. First let DS(p) ≈ 0, i.e., the initial state has the sharply
determined momentum ES(p), then (6.4.42) implies that B∗ ≈[ p−
ES(p)]t−1. In this case measuring observable [p− ES(p)]t−1 gives al-
most de/g192nitely the value of the forceF. This agrees with semiclassical
consideration based on the formula F· t= /Delta1p from the Newtonian me-
chanics.
If on the contrary DS(q)≈ 0, then (6.4.42) gives
B∗ ≈ 2m
t2
⎫
q− p t
m − ES(q)
⎬
. (6.4.44)
Assume for a moment thatp, q are the classical canonical variables. Then
q− pt/m is just the value of coordinate starting from which at t= 0 the
free object will reach the coordinate q at the moment t. To measure the
quantity like (6.4.43) one may in principle perform the joint measurement
of p and q with arbitrary accuracy and substitute the results in the cor-
responding expression to obtain a /g192nal result. Comparison with (6.4.43)
1 A reader familiar with mathematical statistics can readily see that the same expression (6.4.42)
with p, q replaced by p(t), q(t) describes the best linear unbiased estimate of F in the classical
estimation problem using observations p(t), q(t) given by (6.4.33) with p, q regarded as usual
random variables.

236 Alexander Holevo
and (6.4.42) shows that DS0
t
(L0)−1 ≡ D0(L0)−1 = DS0
t
(B∗) so that the
estimate B∗ = L0/D0(L0) attains the lower bound in (6.2.13), which
now can be written as
DF{M}≥t −2
[
DS(p)−1+ t2
4m2 DS(q)−1
]−1
.
This bound is more informative than (6.4.40), but it is valid only for Gaus-
sian states.
6.5. Aboundforthemeasurementcovariancematrix
basedonsymmetriclogarithmicderivatives
Consider a family of states {Sθ} where θ=[ θ1,...θ n] is a multidimen-
sional parameter running over a domain /Theta1. For example, this can be
the family of Gaussian states {SP,Q} with the two-dimensional param-
eter[P, Q]. We shall adopt the following multidimensional analog of
conditions (1) and (2) of Section 6.2.
(1) The family{Sθ} is differentiable as a function ofθ1,...θ n with values
in the Banach space of trace-class operators.
(2) The linear functionals
∂
∂θ j
Eθ (X)= Tr ∂ Sθ
∂θ j
X, X∈ Bh(H )
can be extended to continuous linear functionals on the Hilbert space
L 2
h(Sθ), i.e., there is a constant c such that
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐Tr ∂
∂θ j
Sθ· X
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
≤ c Tr Sθ X2; X∈ Bh(H ), j= 1,...,n .
As in the one-dimensional case these conditions ensure the existence of
the symmetric logarithmic derivatives L
j
θ; j = 1,...,n , which can be
de/g192ned as the elements ofL 2
h(Sθ ) satisfying
∂ Sθ
∂θ j
= Sθ◦ L j
θ. (6.5.45)
Since all our considerations will refer to a /g192xed pointθ we shall simplify
notations by omitting the subscript θ. We thus write S for Sθ,⟨·,·⟩S for
⟨·,·⟩Sθ etc. The symmetric logarithmic derivatives will be denoted L j ;
j= 1,...,n .

237 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
We are interested in measurements M={ M(dnθ)} of the multidimen-
sional parameter θ=[ θ1,...,θ n]. From the very beginning we restrict
our attention to measurements which are locally unbiased at the given
point θ, i.e., satisfy (6.1.1)-(6.1.3) with
∂μθ
∂θk
(B)= Tr ∂ Sθ
∂θk
M(B); B∈ A (/Theta1).
By /g192niteness of the second moments the integrals
X j
M =
∫
ˆθj M(dnˆθ)
are de/g192ned as elements ofL 2
h(S). Arguing as in (6.2.11) we get an alter-
native formulation of the condition (6.1.3)
⟨X j
M, Lk⟩S = δjk .
Since as in (6.2.7)
⟨I, L j⟩S = ∂
∂θ j
Eθ (I)= 0,
this is equivalent to
⟨L j , Xk⟩S = δjk , (6.5.46)
where we have introduced the new variables
X j = X j
M − θj =
∫
(ˆθj − θj)M(dnˆθ). (6.5.47)
Introducing the Gram matrix of the system{L j} in L 2
h(S)
J=[⟨L j, Lk⟩S],
we call it the information matrix. If there exists a locally unbiased mea-
surement, then J is nondegenerate and the covariance matrix (6.1.4) of
any locally unbiased measurement satis/g192es the multidimensional analog
of the inequality (6.2.13):
B{M}≥J
−1. (6.5.48)
This means that for any row-vector v=[ v1,...,v n]
vB{M}v∗ ≥ vJ−1v∗,

238 Alexander Holevo
where v∗ is the Hermitean conjugate column-vector. Since both matrices
in (6.5.48) are real, we can con/g192ne ourselves to real vectorsv.
To prove (6.5.48) we /g192rst note that the covariance matrixB{M} satis-
/g192es
B{M}≥[⟨X j, Xk⟩S], (6.5.49)
where{X j} are de/g192ned by (6.5.47). This follows from (2.9.108) by tak-
ing f (ˆθ) = ∑vj(ˆθj − θj ) with{vj} being arbitrary real numbers. The
remaining follows from
Lemma6.5.1. Let X
j ,L j ;j = 1,...,n be a pair of systems of vectors
in a linear space L, satisfying
⟨L j , Xk⟩=δjk; j, k= 1,...,n ,
where⟨·,·⟩is a pre-inner product on L. Then the Gram matrices of both
systems ΓX =[⟨X j, Xk⟩]and ΓL =[⟨L j, Lk⟩]are nondegenerated and
satisfy ΓX ≥ Γ−1
L .
Proof. Introducing vectors X= ∑u j X j , Y=∑vj L j we have⟨X, Y⟩=
vu∗. The Cauchy inequality for⟨·,·⟩gives
uΓX u∗· vΓLv∗ =⟨X, X⟩⟨Y, Y⟩≥(vu∗)2.
Putting v = u/Gamma1−1
L we see that ΓX , ΓL cannot be degenerate. Putting
v= uΓ−1
L we get uΓX u∗ ≥ uΓ−1
L u∗ and the lemma is proved.
Combining (6.5.49) with Lemma 6.5.1 gives the inequality (6.5.48).
This inequality provides at once a simple lower bound for the total
mean square deviation
Σ{M}=Tr GB{M} with the weight matrix G:
Σ{M}≥Tr GJ−1. (6.5.50)
For the Gaussian family {SP,Q} the symmetric logarithmic derivatives
obtained through (5.6.64) are
LQ = σ−1
Q (Q− Q), L P = σ−2
P (P− P), (6.5.51)
so that
J=
[σ−2
P 0
0 σ−2
Q
]
. (6.5.52)
The matrix inequality (6.5.48) then gives the two scalar inequalities
D(P){M}≥σ 2
P, D(Q){M}≥σ 2
Q,

239 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
where
D(P){M}=
∫
(α− P)2μP,Q(dα dβ),
D(Q){M}=
∫
(β− Q)2μP,Q(dα, dβ)
are the marginal variances of the locally unbiased measurement M =
{M(dαdβ)} with the probability distribution
μP,Q(dα dβ)= Tr SP,Q M(dα dβ).
The inequality (6.5.50) gives
gP D(P){M}+ gQ D(Q){M}≥ gPσ 2
P + gQσ 2
Q (6.5.53)
for arbitrary positive weightsgP , gQ. We shall see in the next section that
this bound is never achieved; a more informative bound will be obtained
which takes into account the impossibility of an errorless joint measure-
ment of P and Q.
6.6. Aboundbasedonrightlogarithmicderivatives
As distinct from the classical mathematical statistics, in the noncommu-
tative theory there are several analogs of the Cram´er-Rao inequality using
different de/g192nitions of logarithmic derivative. Let the family{S
θ} satisfy
condition (1) of Section 6.5; instead of (2) we assume
(2′) There is a constant c such that
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐Tr ∂
∂θ j
Sθ · X
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
2
≤ c Tr Sθ XX∗; X∈ B(H ), j= 1,...,n .
This means that the complex linear functionals
∂
∂θ j
Eθ (X)= Tr ∂
∂θ j
Sθ · X
on B(H ) can be extended to continuous linear functions on the complex
Hilbert space L 2
+
(Sθ ). By the Riesz-Frechet lemma there exist unique
elements˜L j
θ ∈ L 2
+
(Sθ ) such that
Tr ∂
∂θ j
Sθ · X=⟨˜L j
θ , X⟩+
Sθ , X∈ B(H ),

240 Alexander Holevo
or equivalently
∂
∂θ j
Sθ = (˜L j
θ)∗ Sθ or ∂
∂θ j
Sθ = Sθ˜L j
θ. (6.6.54)
The operators˜L j ≡ ˜L j
θ are called the right logarithmic derivatives of the
family{Sθ}. They satisfy
⟨I,˜L j⟩+
S = 0, j= 1,...,n .
The right information matrix is de/g192ned by the relation
˜Jθ =˜J=[⟨˜L j ,˜Lk⟩+
S].
Let M={ M(dnθ)} be a locally unbiased measurement of the multidi-
mensional parameter θ=[ θ1,...,θ n] which we assume to exist. In the
same way as in (6.5.46) we get
⟨˜L j , Xk⟩+
S = δjk .
Instead of (6.5.49) we get applying the inequality (2.9.109)
B{M}≥[⟨X j, Xk⟩±
S]. (6.6.55)
Then applying Lemma 6.5.1 to the systems of vectors {˜L j},{X j} in the
complex Hilbert space L 2
+
(S) we get a different inequality for the mea-
surement covariance matrix
B{M}≥ ˜J
−1
. (6.6.56)
It is important here that unlike J in (6.5.48) the matrix˜J is complex Her-
mitean, so writing (6.6.56) in the scalar form
vB{M}v∗ ≥ v˜J
−1
v∗
one should consider all complex vectorsv, since con/g192nement to real vec-
tors would produce a less informative matrix inequality which does not
take into account the imaginary part of˜J
−1
.
We are going to apply (6.6.56) to the Gaussian family {SP,Q} but /g192rst
we shall /g192nd an important general relation between the symmetric and
the right logarithmic derivatives.
Note that condition (2
′) implies condition (2) of Section 6.6.58 since
⟨X, X⟩±
S ≤ 2⟨X, X⟩S as it was mentioned in Section 2.8. Therefore con-
dition (2′) ensures the existence of both logarithmic derivatives. By the
de/g192nitions of the logarithmic derivatives
⟨L j, X⟩S =⟨˜L j , X⟩+
S (6.6.57)

241 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
for all bounded X. Using the /g192rst relation in (2.8.97) and the de/g192nition
of the commutation operator we have
⟨Y, X⟩+
S =⟨Y, X⟩S + 1
2i[Y, X]S
=
⟨
Y,
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
X
⟩
S
.
(6.6.58)
It follows that ⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
˜L j = L j. (6.6.59)
If the operator (I+ 1
2 iD) is nondegenerated which is the case if the state
S= Sθ is exact, then by Proposition 2.10.1 we get
˜L j =
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬−1
L j (6.6.60)
and
˜J=
[⟨
L j ,
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬−1
Lk
⟩
S
]
. (6.6.61)
What is needed for (6.6.56) is the matrix ˜J
−1
. It can be readily calcu-
lated in the particular case where the subspace L of L 2(S) generated by
the symmetric logarithmic derivatives {L j} is an invariant subspace of
the commutation operator D:
D(L )⊂ L. (6.6.62)
Then I = 1
2 iD is a Hermitean operator for which L is a /g192nite-dimen-
sional invariant subspace. Therefore we can consider I+ 1
2 iD as an op-
erator acting in L and (I+ 1
2 iD)−1 in (6.6.61) as its inverse in L. Then
˜J is the matrix of the quadratic form of the operator (I+ 1
2 iD)−1 in the
basis{L j} and it is known from linear algebra that
˜J
−1
= J−1
[⟨
L j ,
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
Lk
⟩
S
]
J−1,
since J=[⟨L j , Lk⟩S] is the Gram matrix of the basis {L j} in L. Intro-
ducing the real skew-symmetric matrix
D=[⟨L j, DLk⟩S]=[[ L j , Lk]S],

242 Alexander Holevo
we /g192nd the desired expression
˜J
−1
= J−1
[
J+ 1
2iD
]
J−1 = J−1+ 1
2iJ−1DJ−1. (6.6.63)
Consider now the example of the two-parameter Gaussian family
{SP,Q}. Using the relations (6.6.59), (6.5.51) and (5.6.65) we /g192nd
˜L Q = (4σ 2
Pσ 2
Q − 1)−1[4σ 2
P(Q− Q)− 2i(P− P)],
˜L P = (4σ 2
Pσ 2
Q − 1)−1[4σ 2
Q(P− P)− 2i(Q− Q)],
(6.6.64)
assuming that 4σ 2
Pσ 2
P ̸=1. This excludes the case where SP,Q are pure
states. Then by (5.5.54) all eigenvalues of the density operator SP,Q are
positive, i.e., SP,Q is exact. Thus assuming 4σ 2
Pσ 2
Q ̸=1 we just guarantee
that the operator I+ 1
2 iD is nondegenerated for all P, Q. From (6.6.64)
the right information matrix ˜J can be derived but there is a simpler way
based on (6.6.63). Indeed the subspace L generated by the symmetric
logarithmic derivatives L Q = σ−2
Q (Q− Q) and L p = σ−2
P (P− P) is
just R1 for the state SP,Q as de/g192ned in Section 5.6. By Theorem 6.6.1 it
is an invariant subspace of the commutation operator D (this is also seen
directly from (5.6.65)). Therefore (6.6.63) can be used. The matrix J is
given by (6.5.52); since
[P, Q]S = 1, [Q, Q]S =[ P, P]S = 0
by (5.4.38) with R(z)= Px + Qy , /Delta1(z, z′)= xy′− x′y, then
J−1DJ−1 =
[ 01
−10
]
.
Thus according to (6.6.63)
˜J
−1
=
[ σ 2
P i/2
−i/2 σ2
Q
]
.
Choosing for v in the scalar inequality following (6.6.56) the complex
vector[√gP, i√gQ] we get the bound for the total mean-square deviation
of a locally unbiased measurement
gP D(P){M}+ gQ D(Q){M}≥ gPσ 2
P + gQσ 2
Q +√gP gQ, (6.6.65)
which is apparently better than (6.5.53). This bound is the same as the
bound (3.6.58) for the covariant measurement. As we know from Section
3.6 it is achieved by the canonical measurement
M(d
P, dQ)=| P, Q; σ 2)(σ 2; Q, P|dP dQ
2π , (6.6.66)

243 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
with σ 2 = 1
2
√gP/gQ. According to Proposition 3.6.1 a realization of
this measurement is accomplished by the pair of compatible observables
˜P= P⊗ I0+ I⊗ P0, ˜Q= Q⊗ I0− I⊗ Q0
in the space H⊗ H0 where the auxiliary degree of freedom P0, Q0 is de-
scribed by the zero-mean minimum-uncertainty state|0, 0; σ2)(σ 2; 0, 0|.
As we shall show in Section 6.8 this measurement is locally unbiased.
Thus it is the uniformly best locally unbiased measurement of the param-
eters
P, Q in the Gaussian family{SP,Q}.
The bounds given by the inequalities (6.5.48) and (6.6.56) are in gen-
eral incompatible. We have just seen that for the two-parameter Gaussian
family{S
P,Q} the bound (6.6.56) is more informative than (6.5.48); we
now show that for an arbitrary one-parameter family{Sθ} the inequality
(6.5.48) is always at least as informative as (6.6.56), i.e.,
⟨L, L⟩S ≤⟨˜L,˜L⟩+
S .
For this use matrix representation of the logarithmic derivatives in the ba-
sis{ψ
j} of the eigenvectors of S= Sθ . Multiplying (6.5.45) and (6.6.54)
by (ψj| and|ψk) we get
(ψj|Lψk)= 2(sj + sk)−1
⎫
ψj
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
dS
θ
dθ ψk
⎬
,
(ψj|˜Lψk)= s−1
j
⎫
ψj
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
dS
θ
dθ ψk
⎬
.
It follows that
⟨L, L⟩S = 2
∑
j,k
pjk (sj + sk)−1,
⟨˜L,˜L⟩+
S =
∑
j,k
pjk s−1
j =
∑
j,k
pjk
2 (s−1
j + s−1
k ),
where pjk =| ψj|(dSθ /dθ)ψk)|2 ≥ 0. Since 2(s j+sk)−1 ≤ 1
2(s−1
j +s−1
k ),
the required inequality is established.
In the same way the left logarithmic derivative can be introduced. The
corresponding left information matrix is easily found to be ˜J
T
where T
means transposition of a matrix. Remark that
˜J
−1
= Re˜J
−1
+ iI m˜J
−1
,( ˜J
−1
)T = Re˜J
−1
− iI m˜J
−1
,

244 Alexander Holevo
where Re˜J
−1
is real symmetric, Im ˜J
−1
is real skew-symmetric. Since
B{M} is real and symmetric, (6.6.56) implies
B{M}≥Re ˜J
−1
± iI m˜J
−1
.
This shows in particular that the bounds obtained from the right or left
logarithmic derivatives are essentially the same.
In the example of a Gaussian family we were able to obtain the bound
(6.6.65) for the mean-square deviation by choosing arti/g192cially the vector
v. We now show how to obtain from (6.6.56) a general lower bound for
/Sigma1{M} with arbitrary weight matrix G. According to the last inequality
we can write
/Sigma1{M}≥min{Tr GB: B is real symmetric,
B≥ Re˜J
−1
± iI m˜J
−1
}.
(6.6.67)
To obtain an explicit form of the minimum we use the following device.
If M is a matrix which is similar to a diagonal matrix, i.e.,
M= T
⎡
⎢
⎣
μ
1 0
...
0 μn
⎤
⎥
⎦ T
−1,
then one can develop a functional calculus of M; in particular we put
abs M= T
⎡
⎢
⎣
|μ
1| 0
...
0 |μn|
⎤
⎥
⎦ T
−1.
In general abs M̸=| M|≡
√
M∗M; the equality holds ifM is Hermitean.
The product of two Hermitean matrices GR, one of which, say G,i s
positive de/g192nite and nondegenerate, is similar to a diagonal matrix. In-
deed GR =
√
G(
√
GR
√
G)
√
G
−1
and the matrix
√
GR
√
G, being Her-
mitean, is similar to a diagonal matrix. From the de/g192nitions it follows
that
abs (GR)=
√
G|
√
GR
√
G|
√
G
−1
. (6.6.68)
Lemma6.6.1. Let R be a complex Hermitean matrix; then
min{TrGX: X≥± R}=Tr abs (GR),
and the minimum is achieved for X= G−1abs (GR).

245 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Proof. Since X≥± R, then
√
GX
√
G≥±
√
GR
√
G and
e∗√
GX
√
Ge≥| e∗√
GR
√
Ge|
for any column-vector e. Let {ej} be the basis of eigenvectors of the
Hermitean matrix
√
GR
√
G and{μj} be its eigenvalues. Then
TrGX=Tr
√
GX
√
G=
∑
j
e∗
j
√
GX
√
Gej ≥
∑
j
|μj|
=Tr|
√
GR
√
G|=Tr abs (GR).
Substituting X= G−1abs (GR) gives the lower bound and we need only
to check that G−1 abs (GR) ≥± R. Using (6.6.68) we can rewrite the
left-hand side as
√
G
−1
|
√
GR
√
G|
√
G
−1
. Then the required inequal-
ity reduces to the inequality |Y|≥± Y for the Hermitean matrix Y =√
GR
√
G, which follows from the properties of the functional calculus
of Hermitean matrices (cf. Section 2.3).
Assume now that G is real and R is pure imaginary, i.e., R = iQ
where Q is real skew-symmetric. Then the minimizing matrix X is a
real matrix. Indeed by (6.6.68) and the de/g192nition of|Y| we get X =√
G−1
√√
GQTGQ
√
G
√
G−1. This expression involves square roots of
real positive matrices which are again real matrices. It follows that the
result of Lemma 6.6.1 can be applied to calculation of the minimum in
(6.6.67) giving
Σ{M}≥Tr G Re˜J
−1
+Tr abs (iG Im˜J
−1
). (6.6.69)
If the condition (6.6.62) is satis/g192ed, then from (6.6.63) we obtain
Re˜J
−1
= J−1, Im˜J
−1
= 1
2 J−1DJ−1,
so that
Σ{M}≥Tr GJ−1+ 1
2Tr abs (iGJ−1DJ−1). (6.6.70)
We leave to the reader to show that application of (6.6.70) to the Gaussian
family{S
P,Q} gives the bound (6.6.65).

246 Alexander Holevo
6.7. Ageneralboundforthetotalmean-squaredeviation
We have obtained the two essentially different bounds for the total mean-
square deviation. Here we shall derive a general inequality which implies
the bounds based on both de/g192nitions of logarithmic derivative.
We assume that the family {S
θ} satis/g192es the conditions (1) and (2) of
Section 6.5 at the /g192xed pointθ. Let M={ M(dnθ)} be a measurement of
the parameter θ=[ θ1,...,θ n], locally unbiased at the point θ. Introduc-
ing as in Section 6.5
X j =
∫
(ˆθ1− θj)M(dnˆθ)≡ X j
M − θj (6.7.71)
we have the local unbiasedness condition expressed in the form
⟨L j , Xk⟩S = δjk; j, k= 1,...,n . (6.7.72)
where S as usual denotes Sθ.
The covariance matrix of a measurement with /g192nite second moments
satis/g192es the inequality (6.6.55), which using (2.8.97) can be written in
the form
B{M}≥[⟨X
j , Xk⟩S]± 1
2i[[X j, Xk]S]. (6.7.73)
Putting
κjk = bjk{M}−⟨X j, Xk⟩S (6.7.74)
we can write (6.7.73) in the form
[κjk]≥± 1
2i[[X j , Xk]S]. (6.7.75)
The total mean-square deviation is then
Σ{M}≡
∑
j,k
gjk bjk{M}
=
∑
j,k
gjk[κjk +⟨X j, Xk⟩S].
(6.7.76)
Measurement M enters into this expression through the variablesX j ∈
L 2
h(S) and the real symmetric matrix [κjk]=K . We shall obtain the
lower bound for the total mean-square deviation by taking minimum of
(6.7.76) with respect to all{X
j} and[κjk] satisfying the necessary restric-
tions (6.7.72) and (6.7.75). This bound may not be attainable; this will
be the case only if the minimizing arguments{X
∗
j},[κ∗
jk] can be obtained
from some measurement M by the relations (6.7.71) and (6.7.74).

247 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
To /g192nd the minimum it is convenient to reparametrize the variables
{X j} and[κjk] according to the following lemma. In what follows we
shall use the complex Hilbert space L 2(S) = L 2
h(S)⊕ iL 2
h(S).B y
complex extension of a real linear operator A in L 2
h(S) we mean the
operator in L 2(S) de/g192ned by the relationA(X1 + iX2)= AX1 + iAX2.
If A is a bounded real symmetric operator in L 2
h(S), then its complex
extension is Hermitean in L 2(S) etc.
Lemma6.7.1. The elements X j ∈ L 2
h(S); j = 1,...,n and the real
symmetric (n× n)-matrix[κjk] satisfy (6.7.75) if and only if there are
Yj ∈ L 2
h(S); j = 1,...,n and a bounded real symmetric operator F in
L 2
h(S) such that
(1) X j = FYj ;j = 1,...,n ;
(2) κjk =⟨Yj, F(I− F)Yk⟩S; j, k= 1,...,n ;
(3) the complex extension of F satis/g192es
F≥ F
⎫
I± 1
2iD
⎬
F.
Proof. Let{X j} and[κjk] satisfy (6.7.75), and let L be the subspace
of L 2
h(S) generated by X j; j = 1,...,n . De/g192ne the real symmetric
operator K in L by
⟨X j , KXk⟩S = κjk; j, k= 1,...,n .
Then (6.7.75) can be written in the form
⟨Y, KY⟩S ≥± 1
2i⟨Y, DY⟩, Y ∈ L ⊕ iL. (6.7.77)
De/g192ne a bounded real symmetric operatorF in L 2(S) by
F=
{
(I+ K)−1, on L,
0, on L 2
n
(S)⊖L.
Letting Yj = (I+ K)X j we have X j = FYj and
κjk =⟨X j , KXk⟩S =⟨Yj , FKFYk⟩S
=⟨Y, F(I− F)Yk⟩S,
so that the conditions (1) and (2) of Lemma 6.7.1 are satis/g192ed and it
remains to check condition (3). Since the range of the operator F con-
structed above is
L we can putY = FX, X∈ L 2(S), in (6.7.77). Adding

248 Alexander Holevo
to both sides of the resulting inequality the term⟨FX, FX⟩S we get
⟨
X, F
⎫
I± 1
2iD
⎬
FX
⟩
S
≤⟨X, F (I+ K)FX⟩S
=⟨X, FX⟩S,
what was required.
Conversely let{Yj} and F satisfy the conditions of the lemma. De/g192ning
{X j},[κjk] by (1), (2) we can write the relation (6.7.75) in the form
[⟨Yj , F(I− F)Yk⟩S]≥± 1
2i[[FYj, FYk]S]
=± 1
2i[⟨Yj , FDFYk⟩S],
which we need to prove. For this the following inequality will suf/g192ce
F(I− F )≥± 1
2iFDF,
which follows from (3), and the lemma is proved.
Expressing (6.7.76) in terms of the new variables we get
Σ{M}=
∑
j,k
gjk⟨Yj , FYk⟩S, (6.7.78)
and the condition (6.7.72) takes the form
⟨L j , FYk⟩S = δjk . (6.7.79)
The problem now is to minimize (6.7.78) with respect to all{Yj∈ L 2
h(S);
j= 1,...,n } satisfying (6.7.79) and all operators F in L 2
h(S) satisfying
condition (3) of Lemma 6.7.1.
We shall proceed /g192rst keepingF /g192xed and minimizing with respect to
{Yj}. For this we remark that F is a positive operator, moreover
0≤ F≤ I. (6.7.80)
Indeed adding the two inequalities corresponding to the different signs
in condition (3) we get F ≥ F
2 or F(I − F) ≥ 0 which is equivalent
to (6.7.80). Therefore the bilinear symmetric form ⟨X, FY⟩S is positive-
de/g192nite and de/g192nes a pre-inner product onL 2
h(S). By Lemma 6.5.1 and
the assumed existence of a locally unbiased measurement the matrix
F=[⟨L j , FLk⟩S]

249 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
is nondegenerate and satis/g192es the following matrix inequality
[⟨Yj, FYk⟩S]≥[⟨L j, FLk⟩S]−1 = F−1.
The equality is achieved here if
⎡
⎢
⎣
Y
1
.
.
.
Y
n
⎤
⎥
⎦= F
−1
⎡
⎢
⎣
L
1
.
.
.
L
n
⎤
⎥
⎦ .
Thus we come to the inequality
Σ{M}≥inf TrGF−1 (6.7.81)
where the in/g192mum is takes over all bounded real symmetric operators
F in
L 2
h(S) satisfying condition (3) of Lemma 6.7.1. Denote by F∗ the
solution of the minimization problem in the right-hand side of (6.7.81)
(if it exists) and put F
∗ =[ ⟨L j, F∗ Lk⟩]. The variables of the original
minimization problem are then expressed through F∗ by the relations
⎡
⎢
⎣
X
∗
1
.
.
.
X
∗
n
⎤
⎥
⎦= F
−1
∗
⎡
⎢
⎣
F
∗ L1
.
.
.
F
∗ Ln
⎤
⎥
⎦ , K
∗ = F−1
∗
[⟨L j , F∗(I− F∗)Lk⟩S F−1
∗
.
(6.7.82)
An explicit solution for F∗ was found only in particular cases, one of
which will be demonstrated at the end of this section. Now we are going
to show that (6.7.81) is in general more informative than the two previ-
ously obtained inequalities.
Using the second inequality in (6.7.80) we obtain
F=[⟨L
j , FLk⟩S]≤[⟨L j , Lk⟩S]=J .
Therefore F−1 ≥ J−1 and we get the inequality (6.5.51), corresponding
to symmetric logarithmic derivative. To derive (6.6.69) we /g192rst note that
condition (3) of Lemma 6.7.1 can be written in the form
0≤
⎫
I± 1
2iD
⎬
F
⎫
I± 1
2iD
⎬
≤
⎫
I± 1
2iD
⎬
. (6.7.83)
Indeed, multiplying the inequality of condition (3) by
√
I± 1
2 iD from
the left and the right we get
⎫√
I± 1
2iDF
√
I± 1
2iD
⎬2
≤
√
I± 1
2iDF
√
I± 1
2iD,

250 Alexander Holevo
whence 0 ≤
√
I± 1
2 iDF
√
I± 1
2 iD ≤ I as in (6.7.80). Framing this
again with
√
I± 1
2 iD we get (6.7.83). Assume now that the condition
(2′) of Section 6.6 holds providing the existence of the right logarithmic
derivatives. Then using (6.6.59)
F=
[⟨⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
˜L j , F
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
˜Lk
⟩
S
]
.
By (6.7.83) and (6.6.58)
F≤
[⟨
˜L j ,
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
˜Lk
⟩
S
]
=[⟨˜L j ,˜Lk⟩+
S]= ˜J,
so that
F−1 ≥˜J
−1
= Re˜J
−1
+ iI m˜J
−1
.
Since F−1 is real symmetric, this implies that F−1 ≥ Re˜J
−1
+ iI m˜J
−1
.
Therefore the bound of the inequality (6.7.81) is greater or equal to the
bound of the inequality (6.6.67), which is the same as (6.6.69).
We now show that if the subspace
L generated by the symmetric log-
arithmic derivatives L j; j = 1,...,n, is an invariant subspace of the
commutation operator D of the state S, then (6.7.81) gives the bound
(6.6.70). For this we need the proposition which will be used also in the
sequel.
Proposition6.7.2. Let
M be a closed invariant subspace of the operator
D, containing the vectors L j ;j = 1,...,n. Then the value of in/g192mum
in (6.7.81) remains unchanged if F and D are considered as operators
acting in M instead of L 2
h(S).
Proof. Denote by DM the restriction of the operator D onto M. We need
to show that to any bounded real symmetric operator F satisfying condi-
tion (3) of Lemma 6.7.1 corresponds an operator FM in M satisfying
FM
⎫
I± 1
2iDM
⎬
FM ≤ FM, (6.7.84)
and such that
⟨L j , FLk⟩S =⟨L j, FM Lk⟩S, (6.7.85)
and conversely.
Let F satisfy condition (3) which we take in the form (6.7.83). Let
E be the projection onto M, then by the assumption it commutes with

251 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
D. Multiplying (6.7.83) from the left and the right by E and denoting
FM = EFE we get
0≤
⎫
I± 1
2iDM
⎬
FM
⎫
I± 1
2iDM
⎬
≤ I± 1
2iDM, (6.7.86)
which is equivalent to (6.7.84). The relation (6.7.85) holds since EL j =
L j ; j= 1,...,n .
Conversely if FM is a bounded real symmetric operator in M satis-
fying (6.7.84) or (6.7.86) then extending it by zero onto the orthogonal
complement of
M we get the operator F with the required properties.
Returning to the case where the subspace L generated by{L j} is an
invariant subspace ofD we see that we can deal with operatorsF as acting
in L. Since the Gram matrix of the basis L j ; j= 1,...,n in L is J then
the operators F and I± 1
2 iD are represented in this basis by the matrices
J−1F, J−1(J± 1
2 iD). Therefore the condition (6.7.84) in the matrix form
is
FJ−1
⎫
J± 1
2iD
⎬
J−1F≤ F,
whence
F−1 ≥ J−1± 1
2iJ−1DJ−1,
since F is nondegenerate. Thus (6.7.81) is equivalent to
Σ{M}≥min
{
TrGF−1 : F−1 is real symmetric
and F−1 ≥ J−1± 1
2iJ−1DJ−1
}
.
But this is just (6.6.67) with ˜J given by (6.6.63). We thus come again to
(6.6.70). According to Lemma 6.6.1 the optimal matrix F∗ is given by
F−1
∗
= J−1+ 1
2 G−1 abs(iGJ−1DJ−1).
Using (6.7.82) and taking into account the relation
⎡
⎢
⎣
F
∗ L1
.
.
.
F
∗ Ln
⎤
⎥
⎦= F
∗J−1
⎡
⎢
⎣
L
1
.
.
.
L
n
⎤
⎥
⎦ ,

252 Alexander Holevo
which connects the operator F∗ with its matrix, we get
⎡
⎢
⎣
X
∗
1
.
.
.
X
∗
n
⎤
⎥
⎦= J
−1
⎡
⎢
⎣
L
1
.
.
.
L
n
⎤
⎥
⎦ , K
∗ = 1
2 G−1 abs(iGJ−1DJ−1). (6.7.87)
If there exists a measurementM∗ such that these{X∗
j} and K∗ =[ κjk] are
obtained from M∗ by the formulas (6.7.71) and (6.7.74), then this is the
best locally unbiased measurement at the point θ. As we shall see later
such situation takes place in the Gaussian case.
6.8. Linearmeasurements
In the examples considered in Sections 6.5, 6.6 we have found the best
locally unbiased measurements of the mean-value parameters
P and Q
in the Gaussian states {SP,Q} for one degree of freedom. In the case of
one-dimensional parameter the inequality (6.2.13) based on the symmet-
ric logarithmic derivative was used, in the two-parameter case we have
to use the inequality (6.6.56) based on the right logarithmic derivative.
The common feature for both cases is that the observables describing the
optimal measurement are linear functions of the canonical observables P
and Q.
Now we are going to generalize these results to arbitrary Gaussian
states for the CCR with a /g192nite number of degrees of freedom. We shall
show that the best locally unbiased measurement of linear mean-value pa-
rameters in a family of Gaussian states can be found in the class of linear
measurements to be de/g192ned below. Roughly speaking a linear measure-
ment corresponds to a vector observable linearly expressed through the
canonical observables but with the account for possible incompatibility
of the components. With the last essential supplement the theorem to be
proved in Section 6.9 can be regarded as the noncommutative analog of
the classical result of mathematical statistics which says that the best un-
biased estimates of linear mean-value parameters of Gaussian probability
distributions are linear functions of observations.
Let (Z,/Delta1 )be a symplectic space and z→ V(z) be an irreducible rep-
resentation of the CCR in
H. A measurement M={ M(dnθ)} of a param-
eter θ=[ θ1,...,θ n] is called linear if for any state S with /g192nite second
moments in H :
(1) M has /g192nite second moments with respect toS so that the elements

253 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
of the covariance matrix
bjk{M}=
∫
(θj − θ j )(θk − θk)μS(dnθ),
⎫
θ j =
∫
θjμS(dnθ)
⎬
are well de/g192ned.
(2) The elements X j
M =
∫
θj M(dnθ) of L 2
h(S) are in the subspace of
canonical observables, i.e.,
X j
M = R(z j); j= 1,...,n ,
for some z j ∈ Z.
(3) The numbers κkj = bjk{M}−α( z j, zk), where α is the correlation
function of S, do not depend on the choice of S.
The variables{R(z j)} and[κjk] are called the parameters of the linear
measurement. They are restricted by the inequality
[κjk]≥± 1
2i[/Delta1(z j, zk)], (6.8.88)
which follows from (6.7.75) by putting X j = R(z j )− θ j .
Proposition6.8.1. Let z j ;j = 1,...,n, be arbitrary elements of Z,
[κjk] be a real symmetric(n×n)-matrix satisfying (6.8.88). Then a linear
measurement with the parameters{R(z j)},[κjk] exists.
We shall prove this proposition under the simplifying assumption that
{z j} form a basis in Z.
Proof. In addition to the representation z → V(z) in H consider an
irreducible representation z → V0(z) in the space H0 of the different
CCR corresponding to the symplectic space (Z,−/Delta1). This means that
{V0(z)} satisfy
V0(z)V0(z′)= e−i/Delta1(z,z′)/2V0(z+ z′). (6.8.89)
For any states S, S0 with /g192nite second moments
[R0(z), R0(z′)]S0 =−[ R(z), R(z′)]S
according to (5.4.38).
Consider the family of the operators ˜V(z)= V(z)⊗ V0(z), z∈ Z,i n
the Hilbert tensor product H ⊗ H0. By (5.2.9) and (6.8.89), z→ ˜V(z)

254 Alexander Holevo
is a unitary representation of the additive group of Z, i.e.˜V(z)˜V(z′) =
˜V(z+ z′); z, z′∈ Z. Applying Stone’s theorem to the one-parameter
unitary groups{V(tz j); t∈ R} we get
˜V(tz j)= eit˜R(z j ), (6.8.90)
where
˜R(z j )= R(z j)⊗ I+ I⊗ R0(z j); j= 1,...,n . (6.8.91)
Since the operators (6.8.90) commute for different j, then by Section 2.6
the operators (6.8.91) represent compatible observables so that
˜R(z j )=
∫
θj E(dnθ); j= 1,...,n ,
where E={ E(dnθ)} is the orthogonal resolution of identity representing
the joint measurement of ˜R(z j ); j= 1,...,n .
Let S0 be a state with /g192nite second moments inH0 satisfying
ES0 (R0(z j))= 0;
⟨R0(z j ), R0(zk)⟩S0 = κjk; j, k= 1,...,n . (6.8.92)
Under the simplifying assumption such a state always exists. Indeed if
{z
j} is basis in Z, then we can uniquely de/g192ne a bilinear symmetric form
κ(·,·) on Z by requiring κ(z j , zk)= kkj . The condition (6.8.88) ensures
that the form κ(·,·) satis/g192es the condition (5.4.42) and by Theorem 5.5.1
κ(·,·) is the correlation function of a Gaussian state. Taking for S0 the
Gaussian state with zero mean and the correlation function κ(·,·) we get
(6.8.92).
Consider the triple(H0, S0, E). Using Proposition 2.5.2 there is a mea-
surement M={ M(dnθ)} in H such that
μS(B)= μM
S⊗S0 (B); B∈ A (Rn), (6.8.93)
where μS(dnθ) = Tr SM (dnθ) is the probability distribution of M with
respect to the state S. In other words M is the measurement having a
realization (H0, S0, E). We now show that M is a linear measurement
with the parameters{R(z j)} and[κjk].
We need the simple relation
⟨X1⊗ Y1, X2⊗ Y2⟩S⊗S0 =⟨X1, X2⟩S⟨Y1, Y2⟩S0
X j ∈ L 2(S), Yj ∈ L 2(S0) (6.8.94)

255 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
which follows from the corresponding relation for bounded X j , Yj by
taking L 2 limits. Since by (2.9.100) ES⊗S0 (˜R(z j)) =⟨˜R(z j), I⟩S⊗S0 ,
then using (6.8.91) and (6.8.94) we get
ES⊗S0 (˜R(z j ))= ES(R(z j))+ ES0 (R0(z j ))= θ j
since ES0 (R0(z j )) = 0 by (6.8.92). In the same way we get for the
measurement covariance matrix
bjk{M}=⟨R(z j )− θ j , R(zk)− θk⟩S +⟨R0(z j), R0(zk)⟩S0 .
The /g192rst term is just the correlation functionα(z j, zk), thus we see that
the difference bjk{M}−α( z j , zk) according to the second relation in
(6.8.92) is κjk as required.
It remains to show that X j
M = R(z j ). Since the relation (6.8.93) is
linear in S, then
Tr TM (B)= Tr(T⊗ S0)E(B)
for arbitrary trace-class operator T . Putting T = YS where Y is a
bounded operator and S is a density operator, we get
⟨M(B), Y⟩S =⟨E(B), Y⊗ I⟩S⊗S0 .
It follows that for any simple function f (·)
⟨∫
f (θ) M(dθ), Y
⟩
S
=
⟨∫
f (θ) E(dθ), Y⊗ I
⟩
S⊗S0
.
Taking the L 2 limits and using (6.8.94) we get
⟨X j
M, Y⟩S =
⟨∫
θj E(dnθ), Y⊗ I
⟩
S⊗S0
=⟨˜R(z j), Y⊗ I⟩S⊗S0
=⟨R(z j ), Y⟩S +⟨R0(z j), I⟩S0 =⟨R(z j ), Y⟩S,
since S0 has zero mean. Since this holds for all bounded Y , then X j
M =
R(z j) in L 2
h(S), and the proposition is proved.
Returning to the case of one degree of freedom we see that the canon-
ical measurement (6.6.66) is a linear measurement with the parameters
X P
M = P, X Q
M = Q;
κQQ ≡ DS0 (Q0)= 1
2
√
gP/gQ,κ PP ≡ DS0 (P0)= 1
2
√
gQ/gP,
κPQ = κQP = 0,

256 Alexander Holevo
as follows from the realization of this measurement and the relations
(6.8.92). The local unbiasedness conditions
⟨L
P, X P
M⟩=⟨LQ, X Q
M⟩=1;
⟨L P, X Q
M⟩=⟨LQ, X P
M⟩=0
easily follow by taking into account the expression (6.5.51) for the sym-
metric logarithmic derivative (the inner product⟨·,·⟩corresponds here to
the state S
P,Q).
Consider now the simple measurement (6.2.16) of the single observ-
able Q. Clearly X Q
E =
∫
θ E(dθ) = Q and by (2.9.101) κQQ = 0.
Therefore E is a linear measurement with parameters
X Q
E = Q,κ QQ = 0.
In this case ZQ does not form a basis in Z and the construction of Propo-
sition 6.8.1 does not go without modi/g192cations. We can see the reason
for this by observing that the measurement of Q can be considered as
a vaguely de/g192ned limit of the joint measurement of˜Q and ˜P in the re-
alization of (6.6.66) with κ
QQ → 0, κPP →∞ . This corresponds to
gP/gQ → 0, i.e., we ultimately neglect the contribution due to mea-
surement of P into the total measure of accuracy. The limit state with
DS0 (Q0)= 0 does not exist, and this makes necessary a modi/g192cation in
the proof of Proposition 6.8.1.
A kinematical implementation of the linear measurement (6.6.66) was
given in Section 3.6 where Q, P were the position and momentum ob-
servables of a particle in one dimension. In the quantum communication
theory the canonical observables P, Q arise from the representation of
the quantum radiation /g192eld as a superposition of harmonic components
E(t)∼ q cos ωt+ pω
−1 sin ωt,
corresponding to various frequencies ω. We shall give an explanation of
the measurement (6.6.66) in this context. Consider the planar monochro-
matic wave E(t) propagating along the axis z as in Figure 6.2. Since E(t)
is orthogonal to the direction z we can decompose it into orthogonal axes
x, y to obtain
E
x(t)∼ qx cos ωt+ pxω−1 sin ωt,
Ey(t)∼ qy cos ωt+ pyω−1 sin ωt.
Let E(t)= Ex(t) and assume that Ey(t) is described by the ground os-
cillator state S0; physically this means that the wave is polarized in the

257 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
y'
x'
x
y
π
4
z
Figure6.2.
direction x and the y-degree of freedom presents only the inevitable “vac-
uum” /g193uctuations. Introducing the new axesx′, y′as shown in Figure 6.2,
we have
Ex′(t)∼ (qx + qy) cos ωt+ (px + py)ω−1 sin ωt,
Ey′(t)∼ (qx − qy) cos ωt+ (px − py)ω−1 sin ωt.
The components Ex′(t) and Ey′(t) corresponding to the mutually or-
thogonal axes can be separated by a double-refracting /g192lter; the result
is achieved by the joint measurement of the amplitudes
˜p= p
x + py, ˜q= qx − qy.
Turning to the general linear measurement (6.8.91) we remark that per-
forming a linear transformation one can reduce the set of observables
(6.8.91) to a set of pairs ˜P, ˜Q in the realization of (6.6.66). Therefore
any linear measurement over an optical /g192eld can be implemented by us-
ing a /g192nite number of certain optical devices (see Comments).
6.9. Mean-valueestimationforGaussianstates
Consider the family of Gaussian states{Sθ;θ=[ θ1,...,θ n]∈R n} with
the /g192xed correlation functionα(·,·) and the mean value of the form
m(z)=
n∑
j=1
θj m j(z), (6.9.95)

258 Alexander Holevo
where m j(·) are known linear functionals on the symplectic space(Z,/Delta1 )
and θj are unknown real parameters subject to statistical estimation
through the observation of the quantum system. For example Sθ can
be the state of radiation /g192eld representing the mixture of the background
radiation and the signal, in which the amplitudes θ
j of the components
m j(·) need to be estimated. We assume that m j(·) are linearly indepen-
dent.
Theorem6.9.1. The uniformly best locally unbiased measurement of the
mean-value parameter
θ of Gaussian states{Sθ} exists and is in the class
of linear measurements.
Proof. According to Proposition 5.6.3 the family{S
θ} satis/g192es conditions
(1) and (2) of Section 6.5 and the symmetric logarithmic derivatives are
given by
L
j = R(m j)− m(m j ); j= 1,...,n , (6.9.96)
where m j ∈ Z are determined by
m j (z)= α(m j , z), z∈ Z.
We now /g192x the pointθ and consider the bound (6.7.81). Due to the
characteristic property of Gaussian states expressed in Theorem 5.6.2, the
subspace R
1 ⊂ L 2(Sθ) consisting of observables R(z)− m(z), z ∈ Z,
is an invariant subspace of the commutation operator D of Sθ. Since R1
apparently contains the vectors (6.9.96), Proposition 6.7.2 applies, and
we can consider F in (6.7.81) as an operator in R
1. Denote by F the
operator in Z corresponding to F under the isometric map (5.6.56) so
that
F(R(z)− m(z))= R(Fz)− m(Fz).
Then (6.7.81) can be written as
Σθ{M}≥inf TrGF−1 ≡ Σ∗, (6.9.97)
where now
F=[ α(m j, Fmk)], (6.9.98)
and the in/g192mum in (6.9.97) is taken overF corresponding by (6.9.98)
to real symmetric operators F in Z, such that their complex extensions
satisfy
0≤
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
F
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
≤
⎫
I+ 1
2iD
⎬
(6.9.99)

259 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
in the complexi/g192cation of the Euclidean space(Z,α) . Here D is the
complex extension of the operator de/g192ned by (5.2.15), whereα is the
correlation function of Sθ.
Let us show that the in/g192mum in (6.9.97) is achieved. The set of the
operators F in the /g192nite-dimensional spaceZ satisfying (6.9.99) is ap-
parently closed. It is bounded since by (6.7.80) 0≤ F ≤ I . Thus this set
is compact. The function F →TrGF−1 is the composition of the con-
tinuous map F → F given by (6.9.98) and the function F→TrGF−1.
The last function is the supremum of the family of continuous functions
F→TrG(F+ ϵI)
−1, ϵ> 0, and thus is lower semicontinuous. There-
fore the function F →TrGF−1 is lower semicontinuous and by a gen-
eralization of the Weierstrass theorem it attains the minimum on the com-
pact set.
Let
F∗ be the operator in Z which furnishes the minimum in (6.9.97)
and F∗ be the corresponding matrix. Then according to (6.7.82) and
(6.9.96) the optimal arguments X∗
j are given by
X∗
j = R(z∗
j)− m(z∗
j); j= 1,...,n (6.9.100)
where ⎡
⎢
⎣
z
∗
1
.
.
.
z
∗
n
⎤
⎥
⎦= F
−1
∗
⎡
⎢
⎣
F∗m1
.
.
.
F∗mn
⎤
⎥
⎦ .
By de/g192nition the system{z
∗
j} is biorthogonal to the vectors {m j} repre-
senting the mean-value components in (Z,α) :
α(mk, z∗
j)≡ mk(z∗
j)= δjk . (6.9.101)
The elements{X∗
j} and the matrix
K∗ ≡[ κ∗
jk]=F −1
∗
[α(m j , F∗(I− F∗)mk)]F−1
∗
satisfy the inequality (6.7.75). Taking into account that by (6.9.100) and
(5.4.38)
[X
∗
j , X∗
k]S =[ R(z∗
j)− m(z∗
j), R(z∗
k)− m(z∗
k)]S
= /Delta1(z∗
j, z∗
k),
we can rewrite (6.7.75) in the form
[κ∗
jk]≥+ 1
2i[/Delta1(z∗
j, z∗
k)].

260 Alexander Holevo
By Proposition 6.8.1 there is a linear measurementM∗ ={ M∗(dnθ)} with
the parameters{R(z∗
j)} and[κ∗
jk]. It is locally unbiased since by (6.9.101)
⟨L j, Xk
M∗⟩S =⟨R(m j)− m(m j), R(z∗
k)⟩S
= α(m j, z∗
k)= δjk ,
and its total mean-square deviation attains the minimal valueΣ∗ allowed
by (6.9.97). Therefore M∗ is the best locally unbiased measurement at
the point θ. Since the parameters of the linear measurement M∗ do not
depend on θ, it is the uniformly best, and the theorem is proved.
An explicit solution for F∗ can be obtained in particular cases. Con-
sider the subspace ZL ⊂ Z spanned by the vectors m j ; j = 1,...,n
(it corresponds to the subspace L ⊂ L 2
h(S) under the isometric map
z↔ R(z)− m(z)), and assume that it is an invariant subspace of the op-
erator D. In particular this trivially holds if n= dim Z so that ZL = Z.
Then L is an invariant subspace of the commutation operator D. There-
fore we can apply the solution (6.7.87) to obtain the linear measurement
with the parameters
⎡
⎢
⎣
R(z
∗
1)
.
.
.
R(z
∗
n)
⎤
⎥
⎦= J
−1
⎡
⎢
⎣
R(m
1)
.
.
.
R(m
n)
⎤
⎥
⎦; K
∗ = 1
2 G−1 abs(iGJ−1DJ−1),
where now
J≡[⟨L j, Lk⟩S]=[ α(m j, mk)],
D≡[[ L j , Lk]S]=[ /Delta1(mj , mk)].
Recalling the proof of Proposition 6.8.1 we can loosely describe the re-
alization of the best measurement M
∗ as the joint measurement of the
compatible observables
˜R j = R(z∗
j)⊗ I0+ I⊗ R0
j ,
where R0
j are the auxiliary canonical observables in the space H0 with
the state S0 satisfying
ES0 (R0
j )= 0, [⟨R0
j , R0
k⟩S0]=K ∗.
If we put formally /Delta1≡ 0 we obtain the solution of the corresponding
classical problem which is just the measurement of the now compatible
observables R(z
∗
j); j = 1,...,n . This solution is independent of the

261 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
weight matrix G. In the general noncommutative case ZL need not be
an invariant subspace of the optimal operator F∗, and both {z∗
j} and K∗
may depend on the weight matrix G in the de/g192nition of the mean-square
deviation.
Theorem 6.9.1 also allows us to establish a useful property of Gaus-
sian states which characterizes them as “the least informative” or “the
least favorable” from the point of view of an experimenter. Let {˜S
θ} be
a different family of states having the same /g192rst and second moments
as the Gaussian family {S
θ} and arbitrary in other respects. Denote by
α(·,·) their common correlation function. Let M ={ M(dnθ)} be a lin-
ear locally unbiased measurement with the parameters{R(z j )} and[κjk].
Then its total mean-square deviation with respect to the state ˜Sθ is equal
to
˜Σθ{M}=
n∑
j,k=1
gjk[κjk + α(z j , zk)],
by (6.7.76) and by the conditions (1) and (2) in the de/g192nition of linear
measurement. Since κ
jk do not depend on the choice of state by condition
(3), and α(·,·) is the same for ˜Sθ and Sθ , then ˜Σθ{M}= Σθ{M} where
Σθ{M} refers to the Gaussian state Sθ . Since the minimum of Σθ{M} is
achieved on a linear measurement and is equal to Σ∗ from (6.9.97), then
the same is true for ˜Σθ{M}. It follows that
min
M
˜Σθ{M}≤ Σ∗,
where the minimum is taken over all locally unbiased measurements and
max
{Sθ}
min
M
˜Σθ{M}= Σ∗,
with the maximum attained for the Gaussian family{Sθ}.
Thus under the given prior information about the /g192rst and second mo-
ments the Gaussian states give the greatest mean-square deviation in mea-
surements of the mean-value parameters. Choosing the best linear mea-
surement corresponds to the experimental strategy which minimizes the
total mean-square deviation proceeding from the prudent assumption that
the choice of Nature may happen to be the least favorable as regards to
the measurement accuracy.
6.10. Comments
Section 6.1. A brief account of the mathematical Shannon-Kolmogorov
theory of classical communication channels can be found in Kolmogo-
rov’s report [79]. The need for consideration of quantum limitations in

262 Alexander Holevo
optical channels was recognized by Gabor [39]. Mathematical models
for quantum communication channels were considered by Holevo [56],
Ingarden [69] and Davies [28]. For information-theoretic considerations
see Holevo [60] and Lindblad [85]. Concerning the general notion of
quantum communication channel and its capacities see [179], also [178],
Section 3.2.
Section 6.2, 6.3. For the classical Cram ´er-Rao inequality see Cramer
[23]. A thorough geometrical study of the Cram ´er-Rao inequality can be
found in Chentzov [22]. Proposition 6.2.1 is the rigorous version of the
result of Helstrom [52, 53]. The results of Section 6.3 appeared partially
in Holevo [66].
In the quantum case estimation problems with multidimensional pa-
rameter differ from those with one-dimensional parameter rather in rad-
ical way. This happens due to the noncommutativity of the algebra of
quantum observables re/g193ecting existence of incompatible observables
which in principle cannot be measured in one experiment. This sets the
new restrictions for the components of a multidimensional parameter that
are absent in the classical case and leads to inherent non-uniqueness of
the logarithmic derivatives and the corresponding Rao-Cram´er inequality.
As it is well known, in the classical mathematical statistics the Fisher
information generates Riemannian metric on the variety of probability
distributions which is essentially unique monotone invariant in the cate-
gory of statistical (Markov) morphisms [158], [22]. This metric has natu-
ral quantum analogs, but the uniqueness no longer holds. The expression
d(S
1, S2)=
√
2(1−∥
√
S1
√
S2∥1)
de/g192nes metric on the convex setS(H) of the density operators. In the
more general context of von Neumann algebras such a metric called the
Bures metric was studied in detail by Araki, Uhlmann and others. If{S
θ}
is a family satisfying the conditions 1) and 2) on p. 274, then as/Delta1θ→ θ,
one has
d(Sθ, Sθ+/Delta1θ)2 ≈ 1
4
k∑
i, j=1
⟨Li
θ, L j
θ⟩θ /Delta1θi/Delta1θj.( ∗∗)
Thus the Bures metric is locally equivalent to Riemannian metric deter-
mined by the quantum analog of the Fisher information matrix. Moro-
zova and Chentsov [158] described metrics in S(H), dim H <∞, that
are monotone invariant in the category of Markov morphisms. In this
class the Riemannian metric de/g192ned in (**) is the minimal one while the
metric related to the right or left logarithmic derivative is maximal. A

263 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
different example is provided by Bogoljubov-Kubo-Mori metric which
plays an important role in quantum statistical mechanics. Investigations
in this direction were continued in [185, 190], and an exhaustive descrip-
tion of monotone invariant Riemannian metrics on the set of density oper-
ators was obtained. The signi/g192cance of these results for quantum estima-
tion theory needs further elucidation. In this connection we mention a re-
sult from [173] showing that the Bogoljubov-Kubo-Mori metric appears
in the large deviations theory in the bound for superef/g192cient estimates.
The noncommutative analog of the Sanov theorem giving an expression
for the asymptotic of the error of the optimal discrimination between two
quantum states in terms of the relative entropy was obtained in [175,189].
From a general point of view, the studies in the classical geomet-
rostatistics (the term introduced by Kolmogorov) related to the names
of Chentsov, Amari, Barndorff-Nielsen and others [151, 158] lead quite
naturally to the investigations of differential geometric structure in the
more complex state spaces such as quantum state (density operators)
space [152, 196].
Section 6.4. The problem is motivated by the work of Braginskij and
V orontzov [19] who discussed the related detection problem and obtained
(6.4.41) as a bound for the detection threshold.
Section 6.5, 6.6. The inequality (6.5.48) is the rigorous version of Hel-
strom’s result [51, 53]. The inequality (6.6.56) is that of Yuen and Lax
[147]. The optimal property of the canonical measurement was estab-
lished by Holevo [61] and Yuen and Lax [147].
The inequality of Lemma 6.6.1, due to Belavkin and Grishanin, is ad-
duced in the work of Stratonovich [130].
Section 6.7-6.9. The material is taken from Holevo [59,62–65]. Lemma
6.7.1 appeared in the paper [62] devoted to the Gaussian Bayes problem.
The linear measurements were introduced under the name of canonical
measurements in [56].
An arbitrary quantum optical system performing a Bogoljubov-type
transformation is equivalent to scheme composed of linear devices such
as multiport interferometers and few basic nonlinear “squeezing” de-
vices, such as parametric frequency converter [156]. One should add that
an arbitrary Gaussian state can be represented as a response of such sys-
tem to vacuum or thermal equilibrium states, while any canonical mea-
surement as a set of homodyne and heterodyne measurements at the out-
put of such a scheme. In quantum optics an approximate joint measure-
ment of the quadratures q, p is realized by optical heterodyning. Then
the /g192eld of the measured mode is combined with intense reference /g192eld

264 Alexander Holevo
of a frequency slightly different from the mode frequency. Measuring the
intensities of the two /g192elds at the output of the beam splitter of nearly
unit transmissivity, in the limit of in/g192nite local oscillator intensity turns
out to be equivalent to the joint measurement of˜q, ˜p [200].
In particular, by computing the quantity ˜φ= arctan(˜p/˜q) one obtains
an estimate for the phase. This is statistically equivalent to a covari-
ant phase measurement in the sense of Section 6.8 which is of course
non-optimal since it carries redundant information about the amplitude.
(For more detail on the heterodyne phase measurement see Section 3.5.2
[157].) In the work [199] adaptive homodyne measurement of phase was
considered which uses a feedback and electro-optical modulator for the
control of the phase of the local oscillator, under which the phase quadra-
ture R(φ) is measured preferentially. For comparison of the different
phase measurements in [199] the criterion V = min
ψ /Delta1ψ was used,
where /Delta1ψ is the measure of uncertainty (4.7.2), and the minimum is
taken over all pure states with the mean number of quanta less than or
equal to N.F o r N ≫1 the canonical ( i.e. optimal) distribution of the
phase one has V ≈ π
2/N2, while the heterodyne measurement gives
only V ≈ 1/4N. A special choice of the feedback allows to achieve
V ≈ ln N/4N2 which approaches the quality of the canonical measure-
ment, however the problem of its practical realization remains open.
Explicit solutions for F∗ in various particular cases are given in [63,
64]. For applications to concrete spatially-temporal signal models see the
book of Helstrom [53].
The Gaussian state is known to have the greatest quantum entropy
− Tr S ln S among all states with the /g192xed /g192rst and second moments (see,
e.g., Louisell [88]). This gives an alternative corroboration of the prop-
erty of Gaussian states of being “the least informative”.

Supplement1
Statistical structure of quantum theory
and hidden variables
1. Introduction
By the end of XVIII century scientists developed the picture of the ma-
terial world as a huge mechanism, the evolution of which is subject to a
rigid dynamical laws and in principle can be predicted with arbitrary de-
tail and accuracy. This system of conceptions which acquired the name
“determinism” was progressive for that time and was based on a tri-
umphant success of the Newtonian mechanics which allowed to give a
rational explanation to a number of earlier inexplicable physical facts.
However, the development of natural sciences was leading to increase
of the role of statistical concepts. The study of random phenomena started
in XVII century with the simplest models of uncertainty emerging in haz-
ard games. The notion of probability introduced in connection with such
models was very successfully exploited in the second part of XIX century
by creators of statistical mechanics. The laws of heat (thermodynamics)
acquired explanation through statistical behavior of models of matter as
a huge ensemble of identical interacting particles – molecules. Neverthe-
less by the beginning of XX century determinism continued to dominate
at the foundations of natural sciences. The Nature was considered as fun-
damentally deterministic, and observed stochasticity was regarded as a
secondary phenomenon re/g193ecting incompleteness of our knowledge of
the real state of the Nature.
Creation of basics of statistical physics marked a triumph of the an-
cient idea of atomism. But deeper study of the elementary components
of the matter has led to a paradoxical conclusion – these components
cannot be considered as particles in the proper, classical sense of the
word. Depending on the conditions of observation, they can display
1 This Supplement is self-contained and can be read independently of the main content of the book.

266 Alexander Holevo
either corpuscular or wave properties. An electron interacting with va-
por in Wilson chamber leaves a trace which is interpreted as a trajectory
of a material particle. On the other hand, a beam of electrons passing
through a crystal is diffracted making speci/g192c interference pattern simi-
lar to one produced by the light passing through a system of suf/g192ciently
small holes.
Attempts of theoretical explanation of such an unusual, “dualistic” be-
havior of microobjects has led in the beginning of XX century to the
creation of quantum mechanics – the most revolutionary scienti/g192c the-
ory of the recent age. Historically Heisenberg’s “matrix mechanics” and
Schr¨odinger’s “wave mechanics” arose as result of ingenious insights in
search of mathematical objects capable to combine discreteness and con-
tinuity in microprocesses. Soon after Born suggested statistical inter-
pretation which organically /g192t the mathematical apparatus of quantum
mechanics but excluded its deterministic explanation. A deep physico-
philosophical analysis of the content of quantum mechanics developed
by Bohr and Heisenberg has led to a conclusion that it represents a rad-
ically new type of theoretical model of the reality re/g193ecting in its very
structure the wholeness of the system in question and a complementarity
between different aspects of its description. According to Bohr, the no-
tion of complementarity is used to characterize the relation between the
data obtained under different experimental conditions and may be inter-
preted only on the basis of mutually exclusive concepts. One might say
that the quantum theory gives a “holographic” image of realities of the
microworld. However nothing prevents from combining different projec-
tions of a three-dimensional object into one picture (remember the por-
traits of Picasso presenting the same person enface and in pro/g192le). But
“elementarity” of the microobjects excludes a possibility of combining
complementary measuring procedures which presuppose their own spe-
ci/g192c organization in space and time. For example, it makes no sense to
speak about trajectory of electron diffracting on a crystal since any at-
tempt to trace the trajectory changes the conditions of the experiment
such that the interference becomes impossible.
From this point of view statistical nature of quantum mechanics be-
comes closely related to complementarity. The quantities that are mea-
sured in complementary conditions “cannot simultaneously be ascribed
de/g192nite values. In this way, the statistical character of the formalism
is displayed as a natural generalization of the description of classical
physics” [155]. Thus the statistical nature of microprocesses acquires
in quantum mechanics a primary importance. Not only “God does not
play dice”, but there is a fundamental source of uncertainty in the Nature
which cannot be imitated by any classical mechanism of randomness. Of

267 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
course, the outcomes of any particular experiment are just a realization
of a random variable, but the whole totality of experiments relevant to a
given quantum system cannot be given a classical description. The clas-
sical method of description reducing in fact to listing the properties of the
object turns out to be applicable to the objects of the surrounding macro-
scopical world to the extent that quantum uncertainties are negligible at
the scale of this world.
In the dramatic discussion developed in 1930-s the main opponent of
Bohr and other creators of the “orthodox” interpretation of quantum me-
chanics was Einstein whose views were shared by de Broglie, Schr ¨o-
dinger and some other scientists taking active part in establishing the ba-
sic principles of quantum theory. Einstein promoted the idea of incom-
pleteness of quantum mechanics according to which its statistical nature
is due to /g193uctuations of some “hidden variables” yet to be taken into
account, and is to be replaced by a deterministic description in a future
complete theory.
From that point of view an electron has an individual trajectory whether
it is observed or not. The trajectory appears random since we do not know
deeper principles governing the electron’s motion. Having found these
hidden principles, we recover determinism. Such a viewpoint might be
appealing from the viewpoint of naive realism. However up to now all
efforts to /g192nd alternative “deeper” interpretation of quantum mechanics
turned out futile; moreover each such an effort led ultimately to strength-
ening of positions of the statistical interpretation shared by a majority of
working physicists.
The hidden variable issue raised in this discussion can be thus formu-
lated as the question: is it possible in principle to reduce the mathematical
model of quantum mechanics to this or another form of classical proba-
bilistic description? One should admit that the very analytical apparatus
for describing uncertainty in quantum mechanics is so different from the
language of probability theory that an idea of a mathematical proof of
impossibility of introduction of hidden variables, which would stop once
and forever all the controversy, appears naturally.
States and observables are described in quantum mechanics by ma-
trices (operators) ˆS, ˆX; in probability theory the (statistical) states are
described by probability distributions S(dω) and the observable quanti-
ties – by functions X(ω) on the phase space /Omega1={ ω} of the classical
system. Thus the question is about possibility or impossibility of estab-
lishing a correspondence S→ˆS, X→ ˆX between classical and quantum
states and observables, which would reproduce statistical prediction of
quantum mechanics and, of course, satisfy certain important, physically
motivated restrictions.

268 Alexander Holevo
The /g192rst attempt of an impossibility proof was made in the famous
von Neumann’s book “Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechan-
ics” which appeared in 1932. For some this was considered as a de-
cisive argument against the hidden variables. However later it was un-
derstood that this argument does not solve the problem because it is
based on a formal assumption lacking a physical motivation. During the
last /g192fty years the issue was considerably clari/g192ed and even was made
available for an experimental test. These investigations concerning ba-
sic understanding of the nature of physical reality are a substantial argu-
ment in favor of the viewpoint according to which introduction of phys-
ically meaningful hidden variables in quantum theory is not possible in
principle.
In this essay we attempt to give a simple and self-consistent presenta-
tion of the hidden variable issue in a historical perspective.
In the /g192rst part we shall analyze general properties of description of
any statistical experiment and outline the mathematical structures that
arise from this description. These are convexity in the state space which
is due to possibility of mixing ensembles, and partial order of observables
re/g193ecting the degree of informativity in measurement outcomes. Preser-
vation of these structures is a minimal necessary condition for any hidden
variables theory, due to their very universality. This general consideration
of a statistical experiment will also allow us to distill the mathematical
essence of the fundamental notion of complementarity.
The second part starts with the discussion of most important impossi-
bility results for hidden variables. A number of such attempts, starting
from von Neumann’s theorem, descended from the belief rooted in the
orthodox interpretation that it is the complementarity which is the main
obstacle for a classical description in quantum mechanics. An important
conclusion of our discussion is that complementarity excludes classical
description only under additional assumption of one-to-one correspon-
dence between quantum and classical entities. The “technical” condition
of injectivity of the correspondence S → ˆS, X → ˆX present in some
modi/g192cations of von Neumann’s theorem was recognized as the special
property of “noncontextuality” of classical description. Thus a physically
acceptable proof of impossibility can not be based on complementarity
alone and requires appeal to other properties of quantum mechanical de-
scription. Such a property turns out to be the quantum nonseparability
which is discussed in the last section. The argument based on the cele-
brated Bell’s inequality shows impossibility of a classical description for
a composite quantum system respecting separation into subsystems and
hence, also the Einstein locality principle.

269 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
2. Thestructureofstatisticaltheories
2.1. Axiomaticapproachesinquantummechanics
The story of von Neumann’s theorem shows well that the hidden vari-
ables issue does not reduce to a merely mathematical problem. As far as
the matter concerns interrelation between quantum mechanics and prob-
ability theory, the decisive role should be played by the choice of basic
properties characterizing these structures. Therefore before proceeding
to a mathematical consideration of the hidden variable issue we must
carefully analyze and select basic postulates for both theories.
Here it is pertinent to remind that the problem of “mathematical for-
mulation of the axioms of physics” was raised by Hilbert in his famous
speech at the II-nd Mathematical Congress in 1900. Namely the ques-
tion was about “axiomatic construction of those physical disciplines, in
which mathematics already plays an outstanding role: these are in the /g192rst
place probability theory and mechanics.” Notably, in one place with the
logical foundation of probability theory Hilbert put “development of the
method of average values in mathematical physics, in particular, kinetic
theory of gases,” in this way pointing towards the most profound prob-
lems of mathematical physics, the investigation of which later led to the
mathematical methods in statistical mechanics and theory of dynamical
systems.
As it is well known, search for a mathematical basis for probability
theory was completed with the publication in 1933 of the Kolmogorov’s
axiomatic system, giving a set of formally simple and intuitively appeal-
ing statements underlying the whole mathematical structure of the theory.
Quantum mechanics could not be mentioned by Hilbert for the simple
reason that the very physical notion of quantum did not yet exist – the fa-
mous Planck’s report was made four months later in the same year 1900.
The cornerstone for mathematization of quantum theory became the al-
ready mentioned monograph of von Neumann, who started investigations
in this /g192eld in 1926-1927 while being Hilbert’s collaborator [176].
V on Neumann’s works initiated investigations in axiomatics of quan-
tum theory. Considerable progress and clari/g192cation was achieved towards
1960-1970 along the following three mainstreams.
Algebraic approach [33, 127] takes as a basis the “algebra of observ-
ables” of the physical system. This approach turned out to be most pro-
ductive from a mathematical viewpoint: together with group representa-
tions it served as a source for the modern highly re/g192ned structural the-
ory of operator algebras. Physical applications of this approach concern
mainly systems with in/g192nite degrees of freedom – quantum /g192elds and
matter.

270 Alexander Holevo
The quantum logic approach [71, 135, 153, 192] starts with the “lat-
tice of propositions”, i.e. observables taking only two values (0 and 1).
Efforts in this direction culminated with construction of a certain axiom
system characterizing the lattice of orthoprojections in a Hilbert space,
i.e. “propositions” related to a quantum mechanical system. Introduc-
tion of certain algebraic structure (essentially the structure of Jordan al-
gebra) in both approaches requires ultimately certain assumptions whose
physical motivation is not so clear. In 1950-s American mathematician
Mackey made an attempt to present the notions of quantum mechanics
starting from some primary properties of statistical description of a phys-
ical system [92]. Although un/g192nished, this attempt had great in/g193uence
on subsequent investigations.
In 1970-s the third approach to foundations of quantum mechanics ap-
peared in which the notion of state plays a primary or equal role as com-
pared to observables or measurements [27, 64, 171, 186]. The main com-
ponent of the corresponding mathematical scheme is the convex set of
states of the physical system. This approach, sometimes denoted as “con-
vex” or “operational,” could be also called “statistical” because it repre-
sents a far reaching development of statistical interpretation of quantum
mechanics. In particular, it will be shown below that the “statistical ide-
ology” provides also a natural basis for a discussion of hidden variables
issue.
Notwithstanding apparent achievements, there is still no /g192nal form for
a quantum axiomatics. Therefore the main attention in the /g192rst part of this
essay will be paid to those basic assumptions which in this or the other
form underlie any reasonable statistical theory. However /g192rst we must
discuss the classical picture of statistical experiment which will serve a
starting point for further discussion.
2.2. Theclassicalpictureofstatisticalexperiment
In any experiment one can conventionally distinguish the two main
stages. During the /g192rst stage ofpreparation a de/g192nite experimental ar-
rangement is set to establish the “input data” of system or object under
the experiment. At the subsequent stage of measurement the thus pre-
pared system or object interacts with this or another measuring device,
resulting in certain “output data” – the outcome of the measurement.
One of the most basic features of a scienti/g192c experiment is itsrepro-
ducibility i.e. possibility of potentially inde/g192nite independent repetitions
of a given measurement in given conditions. Consider a sequence of
such repetitions of certain experiment. As a rule, the outcomes of indi-
vidual experiments will not be strictly the same and will be subject to

271 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
some random /g193uctuations the magnitude of which depend of the nature
of the experiment and the system under investigation. Thus, although
the outcomes of an experiments are conditioned by both preparation and
measurement, this dependence usually is not deterministic but has statis-
tical character. For classical systems described in terms of phase space,
this can be expressed in the language of probability theory.
Denote by ω the complete set of variables characterizing the classical
system or object. The space of all possible concrete values of ω makes
the phase space of the object.
Preparation of any physical state of the object is made by certain de-
vice which, due to its imperfection or peculiarities of its construction may
not be able to ensure exact reproduction of the values of all parameters
for different individual representatives of this same object. Moreover, the
object may be characterized by such an immense number of variables that
there is no way to arrange complete control of all of them. It is assumed,
however, that the variations of the values ofω being prepared are charac-
terized by certain stability described by a probability distributionP. This
probability distribution ascribing to an elementary phase space volume
dω its probability P(dω) is called the state of the object.
Thus, this de/g192nition of state is essentially statistical one re/g193ecting the
possibility of /g193uctuations of the object’s parameters. Its real content is
that if one considers an ensemble,i.e. very large (potentially unbounded)
collection of independent representatives of a given object, then the frac-
tion (frequency) of those representatives for which the value of ω lies in
a subset B⊂ /Omega1is close to its theoretical value P(B).
Consider two ensembles corresponding to the states P
1 and P2 con-
sisting of N representatives each and let us form the new ensemble by
taking pN representatives of the /g192rst ensemble and(1− p)N represen-
tatives of the second one, where 0 ≤ p ≤ 1. In accordance with the
frequency interpretation the new ensemble will be described by the state
pP1+(1− p)P2, which is called themixture of the states P1 and P2 in the
proportion p: (1− p). Mixtures ∑
j pj Pj of arbitrary /g192nite collections
of states are introduced similarly. Moreover, one can consider continu-
ous mixtures
∫
p(dα) P
α where p(dα) is a probability distribution. Such
mixtures may describe states prepared by a device with /g193uctuating pa-
rameter α. If the states are represented as elements (points) of a certain
set, then arbitrary mixtures of P
1 and P2 /g192ll out the segment connecting
the points P1 and P2. Such a set, which contains the segment connecting
arbitrary two points of the set, is called convex. Thus the set of classi-
cal states which we shall denote S(/Omega1)is convex. A point in a convex
set is called extreme if it is not an internal point of a segment belong-
ing entirely to S(/Omega1). Extreme points describepure states which can not

272 Alexander Holevo
be represented as a mixture of other states. In the classical picture the
pure states are just degenerate probability distributions concentrated at
the points ω of the phase space.
To make this clear consider the simplest case where/Omega1consists of /g192nite
number of points: /Omega1={ ω
1,...,ω N}. In this case state P is given by the
/g192nite probability distribution[p1,..., pN], where pj ≥ 0,∑
j pj = 1.
Pure states are the degenerate distributions[1,0,..., 0],..., [0,..., 0,1].
An important theorem (proved by Caratheodory in the /g192nite-dimen-
sional case and by Krein and Milman in in/g192nite dimensions) says that in
a compact convex set an arbitrary point can be represented as a mixture
of extreme points. If such a representation is unique, then this special
convex set is called simplex. In particular, this is the case in the ex-
ample above. In the case of arbitrary phase space /Omega1one should admit
continuous mixtures of states. Thus in the classical picture of statistical
experiments the state space S(/Omega1)makes simplex in which every state
is a unique mixture of pure states, corresponding to exact values of all
system’s parameters.
The second, conclusive, stage of the experiment consists of measure-
ment of a certain quantity X. Classically, in the ideal case the mea-
surement does not introduce any changes in the system, i.e. amounts
to an observation. In such a case observable X is described by a function
which assigns to every possible ω∈ /Omega1its objective value X(ω).H a v i n g
thus observed X, one can compute outcomes of observations of quan-
tities f (X), where f is a function, without direct observation of these
quantities.
Let for simplicity observable X take /g192nite number of real values{x
j}.
Then
X(ω)=
∑
i
xi Ei(ω), (2.1)
where Ei (ω) is the indicator function of the subset /Omega1i ⊂ /Omega1on which
X(ω) takes the value xi , i.e. the function equal to 1 on /Omega1i and 0 outside
/Omega1i . The subsets /Omega1i are disjoint and form a decomposition of the space
/Omega1, while the family of their indicator functionsE ={ Ei (ω)} makes an
orthogonal resolution of identity:
∑
i
Ei (ω)= 1; Ei(ω)E j (ω)= 0 for i̸=j; Ei(ω)2 = Ei(ω)
for all ω ∈ /Omega1. Now consider observablef (X(ω)), where f is a real
function. Clearly,
f (X(ω))=
∑
i
f (xi)Ei(ω). (2.2)

273 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Even if all xi were different, some of the values f (xi) may coincide.
Therefore, to enable treatment of (2.1) and (2.2) on equal footing, it is
convenient to admit from the very beginning that some of x
i may coin-
cide. Then observation (measurement without errors) will be described
by the resolution of identity E, and to any observable X there correspond
a variety of methods of observation, differing by detail of decomposition
of the phase space /Omega1.
From the point of view of statistics, the resolution of the identity E=
{E
i(ω)} bears all essential information about the measurement: probabil-
ity of the i−th outcome in the state P is equal to
μE
P(i)= P(/Omega1i)=
∫
/Omega1
P(dω)Ei(ω). (2.3)
Operationally, E decomposes initial statistical ensemble into subensem-
bles characterized by the properties ω∈ /Omega1i .
Hence the mean value of the observable (2.1) in the state P (the ex-
pectation) is equal to MP{X}=
∫
/Omega1P(dω)X(ω).
The measurements described by the orthogonal resolutions of the iden-
tity are deterministic in the sense that they sharply classify representatives
of an ensemble. A nondeterministic (unsharp, fuzzy) measurement pro-
vides probabilities M
i(ω) for i-th outcomes for ensemble representative
characterized by the phase space point ω, so that
∑
i
Mi (ω)= 1, Mi (ω)≥ 0.
The collection of operators M={ Mi(ω)} is a resolution of the identityin
/Omega1, which is in general, nonorthogonal in the sense thatMi (ω)Mj(ω)̸≡0
for i ̸=j. Moreover, Mi (ω)2 ≤ Mi(ω). Probability of the i-th outcome
in the state P for such a measurement is equal to
μM
P (i)=
∫
/Omega1
P(dω)Mi(ω). (2.4)
This formula shows how the uncertainty of the outcome in the classical
picture arises from two sources: from the uncertainty in the state prepa-
ration P and in the measurement procedure M.
The resolution of the identity M gives just the probabilities of the out-
comes for an unsharp measurement, but knowing these probabilities, one
can model statistical realization of the measurement involving generator
of random numbers. Assume that there is such a device allowing to ob-
tain values of random variable λ uniformly distributed in [0, 1] (say, a
properly calibrated roulette). Let us describe deterministic measurement

274 Alexander Holevo
E ={ Ei (ω, λ)} over the system which consists of the given object and
a generator of random numbers, which is statistically equivalent to the
measurement M ={ M
i (ω)} in the sense that for any state P probabil-
ities of all outcomes for the measurements M and E are the same. For
this decompose the phase space of the composite system /Omega1× /Lambda1into the
subsets /Omega1′
i =
{
(ω, λ): ∑i−1
k=1 Mk( ω )<λ≤ ∑i
k=1 Mk(ω)
}
and denote
by Ei (ω, λ) the indicator function of the subset /Omega1′
i .
By the construction we have
∫
dλEi(ω, λ)= Mi(ω).
Indeed, for a givenω the integral is simply the integral with respect todλ
from ∑i−1
k=1 Mk(ω) to ∑i
k=1 Mk(ω), i.e. M k(ω). Integrating this identity
with respect to P(dω) we get
μM
P (i)=
∫
/Omega1
P(dω)Mi (ω)
=
∫
/Omega1
∫
/Lambda1
P(dω)dλEi (ω, λ)= μM
P×dλ(i),
(2.5)
which means the statistical equivalence of the measurements M and E.
The procedure of obtaining the outcome by using a generator of ran-
dom numbers, introduced into statistics by Wald, is called randomiza-
tion [22] and the corresponding measurements can be also called ran-
domized.
From the viewpoint of the statistics, the results of experiment consist-
ing of preparation of the state P and subsequent measurement M are
completely described by the probability distribution of measurement out-
comes μ
M
P =
{
μM
P (i)
}
. Notice that the correspondence P → μM
P has
the characteristic property of af/g192nity: if the state P is mixture of states
P1 and P2 in the proportion p: (1− p) then the probability distribution
μM
P is mixture of the probability distributions μM
P1 and μM
P2 in the same
proportion, μM
pP1+(1−p)P2 = pμM
P1 + (1− p)μM
P2 .
2.3. Themainfeaturesofstatisticaldescription
Having in mind the passage to quantum mechanics, let us try to formulate
axiomatically the main features of statistical description of an experiment
without using assumption of classicality,i.e. without introducing a phase
space.
Axiom2.1. Let there be given a set S whose elements are called states
and a set M whose elements are called measurements. With a measure-
ment M∈ M is associated the space U of its possible outcomes. For any

275 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
pair S ∈ S, M ∈ M there is a probability distribution μM
S on U called
the probability distribution of the measurement M in the state S.
Intuitively S represents a more or less detailed description of the prepa-
ration of a “statistical ensemble” and M – a measurement in this ensem-
ble. An attempt to interpret these notions by introducing a phase space
leads in fact to “hidden variables”, but we shall discuss this later. Here
S and M are considered as primary notions. For any (measurable) subset
B⊂ U the quantityμ
M
S (B) is interpreted as theoretical value for the frac-
tion of representatives of the ensemble prepared in the state S for which
the outcome of the measurement M lies in the subset B.
The /g192rst axiom thus formalizes the requirement of reproducibility of
the individual experiments and the stability of frequencies. The follow-
ing axiom says that mixing of ensembles is an admissible way of state
preparation.
Axiom2.2. For arbitrary states S
1, S2 and an arbitrary number p, 0 <
p < 1, there exists the state S called mixture of the states S1 and S2 in
the proportion p : (1− p) such that μM
S = pμM
S1 + (1− p)μM
S2 for all
measurements M∈ M.
An outcome of a measurement can be the data obtained from one or
several measuring devices as well as any other method of representing
the information – for example, a picture on a computer display. Quite
often the information obtained as a result of a measurement should be
processed in this or another way. The result of such a processing can be
regarded as an outcome of a complex measuring procedure including the
given transformation. If M
1 is a measurement with the values in U1 and
M2 – a measurement with the values in U2, such that there is a (measur-
able) function f : U2 → U1 satisfying the relation
μM1
S (B)= μM2
S ( f−1(B)); B⊂ U1,
for all S ∈ S then this means that the outcomes of the measurement
M1 are obtained from the outcomes of measurement M2 by a functional
transformation f . (Recall that f−1(B) denotes the inverse image of B
i.e. the set of all such u2 ∈ U2, that f (u2)∈ B). In this case we say that
M1 is subordinated to the measurement M2.I f U1 and U2 are /g192nite sets,
this means that
μM1
S (u1)=
∑
u2: f (u2)=u1
μM2
S (u2),
i.e. subordination means coarse-graining of the measurement outcomes.
Axiom2.3. For any measurement M, the set M contains all the mea-
surements subordinated to M.

276 Alexander Holevo
A pair of sets (S, M) satisfying the axioms 2.1 - 2.3 will be called
statistical model. The statistical model is said to be separated if
Axiom2.4. From μM
S1 = μM
S2 for all M ∈ M it follows that S1 = S2 and
from μM1
S = μM2
S for all S∈ S it follows that M1 = M2.
For a separated model both the operation of mixing in S and the
coarse-graining in M are uniquely de/g192ned. Then the set of statesS ob-
tains a convex structure while the set of measurementsM – a structure of
partial order.
To illustrate the general notion of statistical model, let us come back
to the classical picture where statistical states of an object are described
by probability distributions on a phase space /Omega1so that S = S(/Omega1).I f
we consider measurements without errors, which correspond to random
variables (see the relation (2.1)), then M consists of the orthogonal res-
olutions of the identity on /Omega1. Then the probabilities of measurement
outcomes in a given state are determined by the formula (2.3). If, on the
other hand, we include measurements with random errors, then M will
consist of all, not only orthogonal, resolutions of the identity on /Omega1, and
the probabilities of measurement outcomes will be determined by the for-
mula (2.4). In this way arise the two basic classical models which differ
in the structure of the setM. The /g192rst is the Kolmogorov model while the
second may be called the Wald model. Both these models are separated.
2.4. Statisticalmodelofquantummechanics
In the previous section we have seen that quite general properties of sta-
tistical description lead to emergence of the two main mathematical struc-
tures: convexity (mixing) in the state space and subordination in the set
of measurements. Importance of these structures in the context of quan-
tum mechanics was stressed already in the book of von Neumann. Let us
consider this in more detail.
In quantum mechanics to a system is related a complex Hilbert space
H. For simplicity we take it /g192nite-dimensional. ThenH consists of col-
umn vectors |ψ⟩=
[
ψ1
...
ψn
]
, where ψj are complex numbers. Denoting
⟨ψ|=
[¯ψ1 ... ¯ψn
]
the Hermitian conjugate row-vector, we can write
the inner product in H in the form⟨ϕ| ψ⟩.Any ensemble of quantum sys-
tems de/g192ning a quantum state is described by a density matrixˆS=
[
sij
]
satisfying
ˆS≥ 0, TrˆS= 1.
The /g192rst relation means that the matrixˆS is Hermitian positive semidef-
inite while TrˆS = ∑
i sii denotes the trace of the matrix. If the ensem-

277 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
bles described by the density matrices ˆS1,ˆS2 are mixed in the propor-
tion p : (1− p) then the mixed ensemble is described by the matrix
pˆS1+(1− p)ˆS2 which is again a density matrix. Thus the setS= S(H)
of all density matrices is convex, the convex combinations describing
mixing of the ensembles. The extreme points of the convex set S(H)
– pure quantum states – are given by the density matrices of the form
ˆS
ψ =| ψ⟩⟨ψ|, with ψ a unit vector,⟨ψ|ψ⟩=1.It is dif/g192cult to describe
the set S(H) in pictorial way, except for the case n = 2, when it turns
out to be isomorphic to the unit ball in the real 3-dimensional space. Any
density matrix can be represented as a mixture of extreme points
ˆS=
∑
j
pj ˆSψ j; pj ≥ 0,
∑
j
pj = 1,
but contrary to the classical picture such a representation is highly
nonunique.
A real-valued quantum observable is described by a Hermitian matrix
ˆX =
[
x
ij
]
with its eigenvalues x j as possible outcomes. Let us write the
spectral decomposition of the matrix ˆX:
ˆX=
n∑
j=1
x j ˆE j, (2.6)
where E j is the orthogonal projector onto the subspace of eigenvectors
corresponding to the eigenvalue x j . The family ˆE={ ˆE j} forms an or-
thogonal resolution of identity in H:
n∑
j=1
ˆE j = ˆI; ˆE j ˆEk = 0i f j̸=k; ˆE2
j = ˆE j ,
where ˆI is the unit matrix. The space H is then decomposed into the
direct orthogonal sum of the subspaces ˆE j(H).
According to the rules of linear algebra, one has for a real function f
f (ˆX)=
n∑
j=1
f (x j )ˆE j . (2.7)
The numbers f (x j ) are not all necessarily different, so that some terms in
(2.7) may be joined in groups. Similarly to the classical picture, it is con-
venient from the beginning to consider representations of an observable
in a form (2.6) where x
j are not necessarily different. Then the reso-
lution of the identity E may be de/g192ned not uniquely and can be more or

278 Alexander Holevo
less “detailed”. The spectral representation gives the unique least detailed
resolution of the identity. By making more and more detailed decompo-
sitions we /g192nally arrive to a “maximal” decomposition which is de/g192ned
by a basis of eigenvectors ofˆX. Such a maximal resolution of the identity
will be nonunique if ˆX has eigenvalues of multiplicity greater than 1.
By the statistical postulate, measurement of the observable ˆX in the
state ˆS gives the outcome x
j with the probability
μˆE
S (x j)= TrˆSˆE j. (2.8)
This and (2.6) imply that the mean value of ˆX in the state ˆS is equal to
TrˆSˆX. For a pure state ˆSψ this is equal to⟨ψ|ˆXψ⟩.
Thus the standard form of quantum mechanics is described by the sta-
tistical model (S(H), M(H)) , where M(H) is the collection of all res-
olutions of the identity in H corresponding to measurements of quantum
observables. The reader have probably noticed the analogy between the
relations (2.1), (2.2), (2.3) of the Kolmogorov model and the relations
(2.6), (2.7), (2.8). It is also natural to consider the quantum analog of the
Wald model in which the measurements are described by arbitrary (non-
orthogonal) resolutions of the identity in H, i.e. the families of matrices
ˆM={ ˆM
j} satisfying
∑
j
ˆMj = ˆI, ˆMj ≥ 0.
While the mathematical apparatus of quantum mechanics contained all
the necessary prerequisites for that, the role of non-orthogonal resolu-
tions of the identity was recognized only in 1970-s with the advances
in the statistical approach. Formally this extension of the notion of quan-
tum observable is similar to introduction of randomized procedures in the
classical picture. From this point of view the orthogonal resolutions of
the identity are similar to the classical deterministic procedures. However
this analogy is not complete in one crucial respect: while in the classi-
cal picture the measurement procedures that are optimal in the sense of
the ultimate accuracy and maximal informativity are usually determinis-
tic, in quantum mechanics the statistically and informationally optimal
measurement procedures are often described by non-orthogonal resolu-
tions of the identity. As it was shown in Section 2, a classical random-
ized measurement can be reduced to observation over a composite sys-
tem including both the object and the generator of random numbers. It
is intuitively clear that such a procedure cannot bring more information
about the state of the classical object than direct observation of the sys-
tem. However in quantum statistics, paradoxically, the use of a “quan-
tum roulette” allows in several cases to improve the data concerning the

279 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
state of the system. The profound reason for this is the “nonseparabil-
ity” of quantum-mechanical description and the speci/g192c “entanglement”
between the parts of a composite system to be discussed below. It is
noteworthy that the recognition of this remarkable fact was stimulated by
formulation and solution of applied problems in quantum communication
theory (see Chapters 3, 4 of the main text).
Since the main objective of our further discussion will be the problem
of hidden variables which arose in the standard framework of quantum
mechanics, we shall proceed within this framework. However the main
conclusions apply also to the extended statistical model which uses arbi-
trary resolutions of the identity for the description of quantum measure-
ments.
2.5. Compatibilityandcomplementarity
Subordination of observables de/g192nes partial order in the set of measure-
ments M which has a direct statistical meaning: if M
1 is subordinated to
M2, then M2 is a more detailed, informative measurement thanM1. If M1
and M2 are mutually subordinated then they areequivalent from the point
of view of statistical information. An example is given by measurements
performed with one device with differently calibrated scales U
1, U2.
Clearly, most important are the maximal elements of the set M which
describe the most informative measurements admitted in the given statis-
tical model. Mathematically, existence of such maximal measurements
may be a nontrivial problem. We simply assume that every measurement
in M is subordinated to a maximal one. In general, there can be many
inequivalent maximal measurements. Uniqueness of the maximal mea-
surement up to equivalence turns out to be a characteristic property of the
classical model.
To explain this we introduce the important de/g192nition: the measure-
ments M
1, M2 are called compatible if they are both subordinated to some
measurement M. In other words, outcomes of compatible measurements
can be obtained as a result of post-processings in a single-measurement
experiment M. Assume now that a separable statistical model (S, M) is
such that all the measurements are compatible. Then the maximal mea-
surement M
∗ is unique up to equivalence. Let M∗ : S → μ∗
S be a
representative and let /Omega1be the set of its outcomes. Since every measure-
ment M is subordinated to M∗, there is a function fM : /Omega1→ U, where
U is the set of outcomes for M such that
μM
S (B)= μ∗
S( f−1
M (B)), B⊆ U.
Due to assumed separatedness of the model the map S→ μ∗
S is one-to-
one af/g192ne correspondence between the setS and a convex subset of the

280 Alexander Holevo
simplex S(/Omega1),so that states can be identi/g192ed with probability distribu-
tions on the set /Omega1and μM
S is the distribution of the observable fM in the
classical state μ∗
S.
Thus a separated statistical model in which all the measurements are
compatible essentially reduces to the classical picture, the role of the
phase space is played by the set of outcomes of the maximal measure-
ment. In this connection it is useful to observe that Kolmogorov’s exten-
sion theorem [78] may be interpreted as a statement about existence of
the maximal measurement for an in/g192nite projective family of mutually
compatible measurements.
On the other hand, if M contains incompatible measurements then the
maximal measurement cannot be unique. Let us return to the model of
quantum mechanics. Let ˆE and ˆF be the measurements described by
orthogonal resolutions of the identity {ˆE
j},{ˆFj} which commute in the
sense that
ˆE j ˆFk = ˆFk ˆE j for all j, k. (2.9)
Then the relation ˆG jk = ˆE j ˆFk de/g192nes a measurement with respect to
which ˆE and ˆF are subordinated since ˆE j = ∑
k ˆG jk , ˆFk = ∑
j ˆG jk .
The condition (2.9) is not only suf/g192cient but also necessary for the com-
patibility ofˆE and ˆF. Observables ˆX and ˆY are called compatible if there
exist compatible measurements for them and this turns out to be equiva-
lent to the condition ˆXˆY = ˆY ˆX. In this way one derives the de/g192nition of
compatibility from the standard formulation of quantum mechanics.
Since there are many incompatible observables described by noncom-
muting matrices, there are many inequivalent maximal measurements de-
/g192ned by different orthonormal bases in the spaceH. These are the or-
thogonal resolutions of the identity which can not be further split into
more detailed ones. In the in/g192nite dimensional space the situation is
more complicated since “continuous” maximal orthogonal resolutions of
the identity appear. Notice however, that even in /g192nite dimensional case
there exist continuous maximal nonorthogonal resolutions of the identity.
They arise as “overcomplete” systems of vectors obtained by projecting
to H of the maximal orthogonal resolutions of the identity in some larger
Hilbert space H
′. A typical example of an overcomplete system is the
system of coherent vectors well known in quantum optics. In many cases
the maximal information about quantum state is carried by the measure-
ments described by such overcomplete systems (see Chapters 3, 4 of the
main text).
There exist physical systems which are in a sense intermediate between
classical and quantum such as systems with superselection rules. Let us
call center of the statistical model (S, M) the collection of all measure-

281 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
ments compatible with all measurements in M. With the center one can
associate its spectrum re/g193ecting the classical properties of the statistical
model. For a classical model the center coincides with the phase space.
If the center is trivial i.e. consists only of the constants, as it is the case
for quantum mechanics, then the model is irreducible. In general one
can expect a decomposition of rather arbitrary statistical model into di-
rect sum or integral of irreducible models. Such a structural theory is
completely elaborated in the framework of algebraic approach and there
are its generalizations to general convex sets of states [4].
Understanding the phenomenon of incompatibility was a decisive step
in the creation of the “orthodox” interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Incompatibility of measurements in quantum mechanics stems from the
fact that physical measurements are performed with the macroscopic ex-
perimental setups, each one assuming complex speci/g192c organization of
the space-time environment. Apparently two different ways of such orga-
nization can be mutually exclusive. “In quantum physics evidence about
atomic objects obtained by different experimental arrangements exhibits
a novel kind of peculiar complementary relationship” [155, page 4]. The
classical mechanics relies upon idealization admitting theoretical com-
patibility of all measurement procedures which is justi/g192ed in so far as it
deals with macroscopic objects the interactions of which with the mea-
surement devices can be as weak as one desires.
The surrounding world which is accessible to direct human’s percep-
tion is macroscopic “by the de/g192nition”. Therefore is it so dif/g192cult to
give an accessible image for complementarity. However Niels Bohr ad-
vocated the idea that the principle of complementarity is quite general
and especially important for biology and for subtle humanitarian rela-
tions which are so dif/g192cult to model mathematically. “The integrity of
living organisms and the characteristics of conscious individuals and hu-
man cultures present features of wholeness, the account of which implies
a typical complementary mode of description” [155, page 7]. Never-
theless so far quantum theory remains a unique case of a mathematical
theory of a segment of the reality which, in its domain, gives an exact
quantitative expression of the dialectic principle of complementarity.
2.6. Classicalandnonclassicalmodels
Consider statistical model (S, M) which is “classical” in the sense that
the states and the measurements are described in terms of some phase
space as in Section 2. However we do not require that the state space S
contains all the probability distributions as well as the set M – measure-
ments of all observables; so we admit that S and M can be de/g192ned by

282 Alexander Holevo
some apriori restrictions (like those arising from complementarity). For
this reason the model (S, M) need not be separated: there can be differ-
ent probability distributions P
1, P2 such that μM
P1 = μM
P2 for all M ∈ M,
i.e. indistinguishable from the point of view of all the measurement
statistics. Similarly, there can be indistinguishable measurements. By
identifying such indistinguishable states and measurements into equiva-
lence classes, we obtain the new, already separated, statistical model.
The description of states and measurements in this new model is “com-
pressed” just to the extent suf/g192cient to preserve the measurements statis-
tics in the initial classical model. As we have seen in Chapter 1, “gluing”
the classical states geometrically amounts to projection of the state space
S onto a subset ˆS in less dimensions. Then even if the initial model
admits all possible probability distributions on /Omega1so that S is just the
simplex S(/Omega1) , its projection ˆS in the compressed model can be rather
arbitrary convex set. Its form is determined by the set M, i.e. by the
restrictions upon the classical measurements.
In statistical mechanics an important role is played by reduced descrip-
tion related to the probabilistic notion of partial observability. Assume
that in the whole variety of variables related to a classical object with the
phase space /Omega1one can observe only the random variables X
1,..., Xn,
as well as measurable functions of them. In this case M consists of the
measurements of observables of the form f (X1,..., Xn). Then the clas-
sical states P1, P2 are indistinguishable if the corresponding expectations
coincide: MP1 f (X1,..., Xn) = MP2 f (X1,..., Xn) for all measurable
functions f (this means that the restrictions of P1, P2 onto σ−subalgebra
B generated by X1,..., Xn coincide). Then the equivalence classes are
represented by probability distributions P(dx1 ...dx n) on the space ˆ/Omega1of
the values of the variables X1,..., Xn, which can thus be taken for the
phase space of the reduced description. One has ˆS= S(ˆ/Omega1)i.e. the sim-
plex S(/Omega1)is projected onto the simplex S(ˆ/Omega1)and the classical nature of
the description is preserved. In this case the simplex is projected “along
its faces” and the geometrical picture is preserved. Thus the reduced de-
scription is an important particular case of the state space compression.
Just to present a different picture consider the following modi/g192cation
of partial observability: assume that one can observe only the variables of
the form f
1(X1) ,..., fn(Xn), where f1,..., fn are arbitrary functions.
Then the classical states P1, P2 will be indistinguishable if
MP1 fi (Xi)= MP2 fi(Xi)
for all measurable functions fi; i = 1,...,n (i.e. the restrictions of
P1, P2 onto σ−subalgebras B1,...,B n generated by corresponding ran-
dom variables X1,..., Xn coincide). Then the equivalence classes are

283 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
represented by collections ˆP = (P1(dx 1) ,... Pn(dx n)) of probability
distributions on the spaces of values of the variables X1,..., Xn. In that
case ˆS is a direct product of n simplexes; in particular, if X1,..., Xn are
two-valued then ˆP runs through n−dimensional hypercube. Thus intro-
ducing apriori restrictions can radically change the convex structure of
the compressed state space.
As we have seen in Chapter 1, for any suf/g192ciently regular separated
statistical model (ˆS, ˆM) there is a classical model for which (ˆS, ˆM) is
the compression in the sense described above. Does this mean a possi-
bility of introducing hidden variables, in particular, for quantum mechan-
ics? To answer this question we should analyze the requirements which
has to be satis/g192ed by a hidden variable model. Such requirements can
be conventionally split into two classes. The /g192rst class is constituted by
the “minimal” requirements which refer only to the general properties
of statistical description for a single system. These will be considered
in the /g192rst place since almost all attempts of mathematical proofs of non-
existence pretended to appeal only to such general requirements. We shall
see that in fact they were based on additional assumptions lacking physi-
cal motivation. Moreover, we shall demonstrate the classical description
for a single quantum system satisfying all the general requirements of
statistical description.
Another class is constituted by requirements which refer to compos-
ite quantum systems and it is these requirements that present the main
obstacle for a hidden variable theory.
3. Theproblemofhiddenvariables
3.1. “No-go”proofsandtheminimalstatistical
requirementsonhiddenvariables
A hidden variable theory pretends to give an explanation of the random-
ness of the experimental results through /g193uctuations of the values of cer-
tain variables ω describing the “real” properties of the object. Therefore
attempts of the “no-go” proofs usually started with associating probabil-
ity distributions S(dω) with quantum statesˆS and random variables X(ω)
with quantum observables ˆX, where ω∈ /Omega1– a hypothetical phase space.
Thus it was usually assumed that there are one-to-one correspondences
ˆS↔ S and ˆX↔ X.
However the discussion of the compressed statistical description in the
previous section leads to an idea that a hidden variable theory should
admit “gluing” statistically equivalent states and observables. Therefore
we accept from the beginning that a classical description of a quantum
system consists of the phase space/Omega1and a pair of mappings:S→ ˆS from

284 Alexander Holevo
the simplex S(/Omega1) onto the set of quantum states ˆS and X → ˆX from
the set of classical observables O(/Omega1) onto the set of quantum observa-
bles ˆO.
The domain of de/g192nition of the /g192rst mapping need not be the whole
S(/Omega1) as well as that of the other – the whole O(/Omega1) . Thus the classi-
cal description brings into correspondence some classical states S(dω)
with the density operators ˆS and some classical observables X(ω) with
Hermitian operators ˆX in the Hilbert space H. One and the same quan-
tum state ˆS can be described by several different probability distributions
S(dω) interpreted as different ways of preparation of the quantum en-
semble ˆS, and one and the same quantum observable ˆX can be described
by different functions X(ω) interpreted as different ways of observation
of ˆX. To denote possible non-uniqueness of the classical description Bell
used the term “contextuality”. The contextuality in the description of a
quantum state displays in particular in the fact that one and the same den-
sity operator ˆS, depending on the context of a preparation procedure, can
be obtained as completely different mixtures of pure states. Similarly,
one and the same projector ˆP, depending on the context of a measure-
ment procedure, can arise as a result of coarse-graining from different
orthonormal bases.
Now let us consider requirements which where imposed on hidden
variable theories. In view of the preceding discussion the following as-
sumptions are the restrictions to be stated explicitly:
(S.0) the mapping S→ ˆS is one-to-one;
(X.0) the mapping X → ˆX is one-to-one.
These assumptions which
may seem “technical” from a mathematical
viewpoint are in fact of crucial importance. At the same time their phys-
ical motivation may be questioned.
The requirement that all the statistical predictions of the hidden vari-
able theory coincide in all respects with the quantum mechanical ones
can be expressed as equality between the expectations:
(E.1) TrˆSˆX=
∫
/Omega1S(dω)X(ω) for all X, S.
If this requirement does not hold, then there is a disagreement between
statistical predictions of the theories which in principle can be detected
experimentally. This would lead to physical questions which are beyond
the scope of the present mathematical consideration.
The next group of requirements concerns the properties of the map-
ping X → ˆX. The relation (2.7) shows that the outcomes of observ-
able f (ˆX) can be obtained from the outcomes of ˆX by mere compu-
tation x
i → f (xi ). But in a hidden variable theory a measurement of

285 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
ˆX is reduced to observation of some X(ω). The subsequent computa-
tion x → f (x) is equivalent to a direct observation of f (X(ω)). Thus
in the hidden variable theory observation of f (X) represents a way of
measuring the quantum observable f (ˆX). This motivates the following
functional condition:
(X.1) if X → ˆX then f (X)→ f (ˆX).
This is closely related to the following two conditions:
(X.2) if X → ˆX then any value X (ω) belongs to the spectrum {xi} of
quantum observable ˆX.
The meaning of thisspectral condition is clear: a hidden variable descrip-
tion should preserve “objective values” of observables.
(X.3) for any pair of compatible quantum observables ˆX, ˆY there ex-
ist the corresponding classical observables X , Y such that X →
ˆX, Y → ˆY and X + Y → ˆX+ ˆY .
Compatibility of quantum observables means that there is a measuring
device which produces the outcomes of measurement of both ˆX and ˆY.
Complementing this with a summator we obtain a device for measuring
ˆX + ˆY. The /g192nite sum rule(X.3) re/g193ects this possibility in the hidden
variable theory. It can be replaced with the following /g192nite product rule:
(X.4) for any pair of compatible quantum observables ˆX, ˆY there ex-
ist the corresponding classical observables X , Y such that X →
ˆX, Y → ˆY and XY → ˆXˆY .
Lemma3.1. The functional condition (X.1) implies the /g192nite sum rule
(X.3) and the /g192nite product rule(X.4). Under (X.0), the condition (X.1)
implies also the spectral condition (X.2).
Proof. If ˆX,ˆY are compatible then there existsˆZ such that ˆX= f (ˆZ),ˆY=
g(ˆZ). Let Z → ˆZ be the corresponding classical
observable, then by
(X.1) X = f (Z) → ˆX and Y = g(Z) → ˆY. Therefore X + Y =
( f + g)(Z)→ ( f + g)(ˆZ)= ˆX+ ˆY . This proves (X.3), and (X.4) is
proved similarly.
Let the correspondence X → ˆX be one-to-one so that we can write
X ↔ ˆX. Consider the function f0(x)≡ 0. Applying (X.1) to this func-
tion, we have 0 ↔ ˆ0, whereˆ0 is the zero operator and 0 is the classical
observable identically equal to zero. Let P(x) be the characteristic poly-
nomial of an Hermitian operatorˆX, so that P(ˆX)=ˆ0. If X↔ ˆX then by
(X.1) P(X)↔ P(ˆX) hence P(X(ω))≡ 0 i.e. any value X(ω) belongs
to the spectrum of quantum observable ˆX.

286 Alexander Holevo
The conditions (E.1) and (X.1) imply the following ampli/g192cation of
the property of statistical correspondence:
(E.2) TrˆSf (ˆX)=
∫
/Omega1S(dω) f (X(ω)) for all X, S, f.
Notice that while (E.2) trivially implies (E.1), the condition (X.1) follows
only under some additional assumption. A subset S
0 ⊆ S(/Omega1) will be
called separating if the equality
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)X1(ω)=
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)X2(ω) for all S∈ S0
implies X1 = X2. If the set of probability distributions which correspond
to all possible quantum states in the given classical description (let us
denote it S
0) is separating then the condition (E.1) implies (X.0) and
(E.2) implies (X.1). Indeed, let Y → f (ˆX) then by (E.2)
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)Y(ω)= TrˆSf (ˆX)=
∫
/Omega1
S(dω) f (X(ω)) for all S∈ S0
whence f (X)= Y → f (ˆX).
Finally let us discuss the linearity condition:
(X.5) ˆ(λX+ μY)= λˆX+ μˆY for all X, Y and real λ,μ .
This mathematically innocent condition is not justi/g192ed physically as it
was mentioned already in the von Neumann’s book [138]. If ˆX and ˆY
are incompatible then measurements of observables ˆX,ˆY and ˆX+ ˆY may
have nothing in common apart from equality of the mean values. This
last relation was used by von Neumann to motivate the condition (X.5).
Let us analyze the corresponding argument as given in
2: “In quantum
mechanics the mean values satisfy the relation ⟨ˆX+ ˆY⟩=⟨ˆX⟩+⟨ˆY⟩.
Therefore in a hidden variable model it should hold
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)(X+ Y)(ω)=
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)X(ω)+
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)Y(ω). (3.10)
Since to different density matricesˆS correspond different probability dis-
tributions S(dω), it is natural to require that
(X+ Y)(ω)= X(ω)+ Y(ω) (3.11)
2 A.I. Akhiezer, R.V . Polovin, Why it is impossible to introduce hidden variables in quantum me-
chanics? UFN 107(3) (1972) 463-487.

287 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
for arbitrary classical observables X, Y which may correspond to com-
muting as well as noncommuting operators ˆX, ˆY.”
However (3.11) follows from (3.10) only under additional assumption
that the set of classical states S0 in the hidden variable theory is separat-
ing. Is such an assumption “natural”? A very simple (and generic) exam-
ple of nonseparating set is the subset of probability distributions S(dω)
on a product /Omega1
′× /Omega1′′which have the form S(dω)= S′(dω′)P(dω′′),
where S′(dω′) is arbitrary distribution on/Omega1′and P(dω′′) is a /g192xed distri-
bution on /Omega1′′. This is just the case in the explicit hidden variable models.
The distribution P(dω′′) plays a role of the equilibrium state of the “hid-
den” subsystem which provides stochasticity to the measurement out-
comes [10].
Under the condition of one-to-one correspondence (X.0) the conditions
(X.1)-(X.5) turn into the requirements which were used in the “no-go”
proofs for hidden variables. Let us give here the most signi/g192cant results
in this direction in the formulation adapted to the proposed general clas-
si/g192cation.
The /g192rst statement is close to what is called the von Neumann theorem.
Proposition3.2. There is no classical description satisfying the condi-
tions (X.0), (X.2), (X.5).
From the discussion above we see that this can be also formulated as
follows: there is no classical description with separating set of classical
states, satisfying the condition (E.2).
Proof. Assume that a classical description with the properties (X.0),
(X.2), (X.5) exists. By (X.0) there is unique X such that X → ˆX. Fix
a point ω
0 of the phase space and consider the functional on operators
given by F(ˆX)= X(ω0). By (X.5) this functional is linear. In the /g192nite
dimensional case we are considering, it is almost obvious that every such
functional has the form F(ˆX)= TrˆPˆX, where ˆP ∈ ˆO. Let ˆX run over
all possible projections in H so that its eigenvalues are x
i = 0, 1. Then
by (X.2) the quantity X(ω0)= TrˆPˆX assumes only the values 0, 1 which
is apparently impossible for any choice of ˆP.
Of historical interest is the following remark of Wigner to his article
on hidden variables [198]: “The discussion of V on Neumann, most com-
monly quoted, is that contained in his book, Sections 4.1 and 4.2. As
an old friend of V on Neumann, and in order to preserve historical accu-
racy, the present writer may be permitted the observation that the proof
contained in this book was not the one which was principally responsi-
ble for V on Neumann’s conviction of the inadequacy of hidden variable

288 Alexander Holevo
theories...” 3 However independently of the meaning given to these ar-
guments by von Neumann, published in his monographs they were con-
sidered as decisive argument against hidden variables for the years until
1950-s with the appearance of papers of Bohm (1952) and Wiener and
Siegel (1953), which contained explicit (although not completely trans-
parent) constructions of hidden variable models. On the other hand, sev-
eral improvements of the von Neumann “no-go theorem” appeared. The
situation was radically clari/g192ed with the works of Bell (1966) and also
Kochen and Specker (see [11, 77]).
In the year 1957 Gleason [168] proved the following quite nontrivial
theorem which gave an answer to a question of Mackey:
Let F (ˆE) be a probability measure on projections in the Hilbert space
H of dimensionality≥ 3, i.e. the real function satisfying the conditions:
1)F(ˆE) ≥ 0; 2) for any orthogonal resolution of the identity {ˆE
i} it
holds∑
i F(ˆEi )= 1. Then F(ˆE)= TrˆSˆE, whereˆS is a density operator
in H.
This implies
Proposition3.3. If dim H≥3 then there is no classical description sat-
isfying the conditions (X.0), (X.2), (X.3).
Indeed, if such a description exists then the function F(ˆE) = E(ω0),
where E ↔ ˆE, satis/g192es the conditions of Gleason’s theorem. Then
F(ˆE)= TrˆSˆE and we come to the contradiction as in the proof of Propo-
sition 1.
The proof of Gleason’s theorem remains dif/g192cult even after a number
of subsequent simpli/g192cations. Gleason himself did not apply his the-
orem to the hidden variable problem. This possibility was noticed by
Bell. Moreover he extracted the geometrical idea behind Gleason’s proof
which is essential from the viewpoint of hidden variables issue and gave
a short direct proof of the following statement which in our presentation
follows from Proposition 3.3 and the Lemma 3.1:
Proposition3.4. If dim H≥3 then there is no classical description sat-
isfying the conditions (X.0) and (X.1).
Similar result was independently and in a quite different way obtained
by Kochen and Specker [77] who gave an explicit construction of 117
(later more “economical” constructions were designed) unit vectors in
three-dimensional space on which one cannot de/g192ne a measure with the
3 This unpublished argument of von Neumann will be considered in the next section.

289 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
properties 1), 2) from Gleason’s theorem and assuming only the values
0 or 1. In other words, the geometry of this system is such that the con-
ditions de/g192ning such a measure become self-contradictory. Later it was
observed that the proof of Bell in fact amounts to construction of a certain
system of 13 vectors [10].
The case dim H=2 corresponding to spin-1/2 particle is special. In
the papers of Bell and of Kochen-Specker explicit hidden variable con-
structions were given for this case. One more construction follows from
the general model which will be given in the next section. These con-
structions clearly demonstrate insuf/g192ciency of the “no-go” proofs of the
type of Proposition 3.2.
Notice that the Propositions 3.3 and 3.4 do not use at all the condi-
tion of statistical correspondence (E.1) which in fact should be central
for a hidden variable theory. These results do not concern statistics and
speak only of impossibility of the one-to-one correspondence between
the “quantum logic” of projections and the Boolean algebra of classical
events preserving the algebraic relations between the compatible vari-
ables. The key condition here is (X.0) as it was understood in the work
of Bell.
These mathematical results do not contradict explicit hidden variable
models such as Bohm’s model and Wiener-Siegel model: the assumption
which is not ful/g192lled in these models is the condition (X.0) of one-to-
one correspondence. We already noticed that a reasonable assumption
would be to admit that one and the same quantum observable can be mea-
sured in many different ways (which in particular is re/g193ected in possible
nonuniqueness of the resolution of the identity entering the representation
(2.6)). Propositions 3.3, 3.4 imply that in a hidden variable theory satis-
fying functional conditions of the type (X.1)-(X.4) such a nonuniqueness
is unavoidable.
A different approach to “no-go” proofs is related to the ideas of Wigner
and Blokhintsev on the impossibility of de/g192ning a joint distribution for
incompatible quantum observables and is based on the analysis of the
properties of the mapping S→ ˆS.
Consider the classical state S and the corresponding quantum state ˆS.
Then the classical ensemble de/g192ned by the probability distributionS(dω)
replaces the quantum ensemble representing ˆS. The mixture pS
1 + (1−
p)S2 of the classical ensembles represents the quantum ensemble pˆS1 +
(1− p)ˆS2. This leads to the following af/g192nity condition:
(S.1) for S1 → ˆS1, S2 → ˆS2 and a real p, satisfying 0 < p < 1 it holds
pS1+ (1− p)S2 → pˆS1+ (1− p)ˆS2.

290 Alexander Holevo
Proposition3.5. There is no classical description satisfying the condi-
tions (E.2), (S.0), (S.1).
Proof. Assume that such a description exists and consider two arbitrary
quantum observables ˆX, ˆY. Let X, Y be some corresponding classical
observables. Due to the condition (S.0), there is one-to-one af/g192ne corre-
spondence S↔ ˆS and the formula
μ
ˆS (B)= S (ω: (X(ω), Y(ω))∈ B)
de/g192nes a probability distribution on the planeR2. Due to (S.1) the map-
ping ˆS → μˆS is af/g192ne and hence de/g192nes a generalized quantum mea-
surement with outcomes (x, y) . By using the condition (E.2) we obtain
that distributions of observables ˆX, ˆY are marginals of the distribution
μˆS (dx , dy) . Hence we come to an absurd conclusion that any two quan-
tum observables ˆX, ˆY are compatible.
This argument follows essentially the paper of Srinivas [195], where it
is stressed that the key condition here is (S.0). Any quantum state ˆS can
be represented in many different ways as the mixture of pure states. If
a hidden variable theory satisfying the conditions (E.2), (S.1) is possible
then it should necessarily admit such a nonuniqueness. In this respect the
condition (S.0) is similar to (X.0).
Thus among the requirements which were proposed for hidden variable
theories one should distinguish (E.1), (X.1), (S.1) (as well as the related
conditions (E.2), (X.2)-(X.4)) which have sound statistical motivation.
Essentially, these conditions require that the classical description should
preserve the main structural properties of statistical model expressed by
the axioms (A.1)-(A.3). The “no-go” theorems in fact do not forbid such
theories. A mathematically and physically motivated conclusion is that a
classical description satisfying these requirements should have necessar-
ily non-unique nature admitting possibility of compression in transition
to quantum theory.
3.2. Ahiddenvariablemodelforasinglequantumsystem
In the work of Kochen and Specker [77] the authors gave a “trivial” hid-
den variable model satisfying the statistical condition (E.1) but not pre-
serving the structure of functional dependences in quantum mechanics.
The idea was straightforward and amounts to introducing a personal “hid-
den variable” for each observable ˆX producing stochasticity in outcomes
of measurement of ˆX. The totality of all such hidden variables is then
the phase space variable ω of the model. The purpose of this construc-
tion was to demonstrate insuf/g192ciency of the statistical condition (E.1) and

291 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
the power of the functional condition (X.1). However we will show that
basing on a similar idea one can construct a hidden variable model satis-
fying all the minimal requirements (E.1), (X.1), (S.1). The key feature is
of course the non-uniqueness of the classical description.
Denote by /Omega1
′the set of all pure quantum states, so that for any ω′∈
/Omega1′there is a unit vector ψω′∈ H such that Trω′ˆX =⟨ψω′|ˆXψω′⟩.Every
quantum state can be written as a mixture of pure states
ˆS=
∫
/Omega1′
ω′S′(dω′), (3.12)
where S′(dω′) is a probability distribution on /Omega1′, and this representation
is of course not unique. The relation (3.12) de/g192nes af/g192ne mappingS′→
ˆS of the simplex S(/Omega1′) onto the convex set ˆS.
LetˆE={ˆEi} be an orthogonal resolution of the identity inH describing
a quantum measurement. It suf/g192ces to restrict to the maximal measure-
ments for which ˆE
i are projections onto the vectors ei of an orthonormal
basis. Put
Mi (ω′)= Trω′ˆEi =|⟨ψω′|ei⟩|2 , (3.13)
then ˆM=
{
Mi(ω′)
}
will be a classical randomized measurement on /Omega1′.
The relations (3.12), (3.13) imply
TrˆSˆEi =
∫
/Omega1′
S′(dω′)Mi(ω′). (3.14)
Thus we succeeded to build a classical model in which states are de-
scribed by probability distributions on the “phase space”/Omega1
′and the (max-
imal) quantum measurements – by randomized classical measurements
M, with the statistical correspondence condition (3.14) ful/g192lled. The
quantum theory is the compressed description of this model in the sense
of Section 2.6 (cf. also Theorem 1.7.1).
The next step is to realize every classical randomized measurement
(3.13) with the help of randomizing probability space
⎫
/Lambda1
ˆE, dλˆE
⎬
for ex-
ample as it is described at the end of Section 2.2. One can say that to ev-
ery maximal quantum measurement corresponds a “roulette”
⎫
/Lambda1
ˆE, dλˆE
⎬
which models stochasticity of the measurement outcomes in any pure
state ω
′. If the state ˆS is mixed, then the probability distribution of the
measurement outcomes is given by the corresponding mixture
TrˆSˆEi =
∫
/Omega1′
∫
/Lambda1ˆE
S′(dω′)dλˆE Ei
⎫
ω′,λˆE
⎬
, (3.15)
as it is seen from (3.14) and (2.5). To embrace the totality of the maximal
quantum measurements, let us introduce the product of probability spaces

292 Alexander Holevo
⎫
/Omega1′′, P′′⎬
= ∏
ˆE
⎫
/Lambda1ˆE, dλˆE
⎬
. Thus every ω′′∈ /Omega1′′is a collection ω′′=∏
ˆE λˆE of independent “roulettes” corresponding to all possible maximal
quantum measurements so that P(dω′′)= ∏
ˆE dλˆE.
Now de/g192ne the phase space of the sought classical description as/Omega1=
/Omega1′× /Omega1′′, so that ω=
⎫
ω′,ω′′⎬
. The classical states will be given by the
probability distributions on/Omega1having the form S(dω)= S′(dω′)P(dω′′),
where S′is an arbitrary probability distribution on/Omega1′. The mapping S→
ˆS is de/g192ned as
ˆS=
∫
/Omega1
ω′S′(dω)=
∫
/Omega1′
ω′S′(dω′). (3.16)
To every maximal quantum measurement ˆE corresponds uniquely the
deterministic classical measurement E = {Ei(ω)}, where Ei(ω) =
Ei
⎫
ω′,λˆE
⎬
, and λˆE = πˆE(ω′′) is the coordinate projection of the point
ω′′. From (3.15) it follows that
TrˆSˆEi =
∫
/Omega1
S(dω)Ei (ω). (3.17)
It remains to establish correspondence between quantum observables and
random variables on /Omega1.Let ˆX be a quantum observable and ˆE={ˆE
i} -
one of the corresponding maximal measurements, so that ˆX = ∑
i xi ˆEi.
Let E={Ei(ω)} be the corresponding classical deterministic measure-
ment. Consider the random variable X(ω)= ∑
i xi Ei (ω). Since ˆE is in
general nonunique, we obtain a collection of random variables X(ω)→
ˆX corresponding to different ˆE. It is important that X(ω) depends on ω′′
only via the coordinate projection λˆE = πˆE(ω′′). If X(ω) ̸=const this
allows to reconstruct E uniquely given X(ω). The values xi are also re-
constructed by X. Then from E one recoversˆE and hence ˆX= ∑
i xi ˆEi.
Therefore the mapping X → ˆX is well de/g192ned forX(ω) ̸=const. In
case X(ω)≡ λ we have xi ≡ λ, hence ˆX =λˆI so the mapping is unam-
biguously de/g192ned also in this case.
From (3.17) it follows that the statistical correspondence (E.1) holds.
The mapping S→ ˆS is af/g192ne, so that (S.1) also holds. Let us check the
functional condition (X.1). If X is a random variable, X → ˆX, and f a
function, then f (X(ω))= ∑
i f (xi)Ei(ω). Without loss of generality we
can assume both X and f nonconstant. Then ˆE and hence ˆX is recovered
from X uniquely, so that ˆf (X)= ∑
i f (xi)ˆEi = f (ˆX).
Notice that in the case dim H=2 every nontrivial resolution of the
identity in H is maximal, therefore our construction in this case satis/g192es
even the uniqueness condition (X.0). This explains the restriction dim
H≥3 in Propositions 3.3, 3.4.

293 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
In brief, the proposed classical description is constructed so as to make
distinguishable all the mixtures giving the same quantum state as well as
all the measurements giving the same quantum observable. The corre-
spondence S → ˆS is one-to-one only for the pure states ˆS and the cor-
respondence X → ˆX – only for the maximal observables with simple
spectrum.
Certainly this model does not pretend to replace the mathematical ap-
paratus of quantum mechanics. It is also extremely wasteful from the
viewpoint of representing the measurement statistics as it contains a lot
of irrelevant “detail”. However it is relevant in making explicit the struc-
tural properties of quantum theory which can be preserved in classical
description and in showing that “no-go” proof for hidden variables can-
not be based solely on the minimal statistical requirements (E.1), (S.1),
(X.1). Complementarity does not prevent from a classical description as
soon as the classical-quantum correspondence is not required to be one-
to-one. Similar conclusions hold for rather arbitrary separated statistical
model since the minimal statistical requirements concern only the com-
mon properties of quantum mechanical description. Thus consideration
of the hidden variable hypothesis should involve more speci/g192c properties
of the quantum mechanical description.
3.3. Hiddenvariablesandevolutionsofquantumsystem
Here we discuss the question: can a classical description reproduce tem-
poral quantum evolutions including a) the reversible dynamics as deter-
mined by the Schr ¨odinger equation; b) state changes (reductions) due to
repeated quantum measurements.
The quantum dynamics of a single system is translated into the classi-
cal description proposed in the previous section without great dif/g192culties.
The complex unit state vector ψ de/g192nes the coordinates
[
ψ
j , ¯ψj
]
on the
variety of pure states/Omega1′, and the Schr¨odinger equation dψ
dt =− iH ψ with
the Hamiltonian H generates a /g193ow
{
T′
t
}
on /Omega1′which can be written in
the coordinates
[
ψj, ¯ψj
]
as a classical Hamiltonian system
dψj
dt =− i ∂
∂¯ψj
/Gamma1
⎫
ψ, ¯ψ
⎬
,
d¯ψj
dt = i ∂
∂ψ j
/Gamma1
⎫
ψ, ¯ψ
⎬
; j= 1,...,n ,
with the Hamiltonian function /Gamma1
⎫
ψ, ¯ψ
⎬
= (ψ|Hψ) . Putting T′′
t ω′′=
ω′′, we obtain a /g193owTt = T′
t × T′′
t de/g192ning the dynamics of the corre-
sponding classical model.

294 Alexander Holevo
The question of describing repeated measurements and reductions is
more complicated. A genuine hidden variable model should completely
reduce measurements to observations and in this way resolve the enig-
matic “measurement problem”. A lot of attention was paid to this prob-
lem in physical and philosophical literature (see, e.g. [71, 138, 171, 186,
198]) while our remarks will be rather sketchy.
First we describe repeated measurements in quantum mechanics. Let
a measurement ˆE={ˆE
i} and then a measurement ˆF={ˆFj} be performed
over a quantum system in the initial state ˆS. The formula (2.8) is insuf/g192-
cient in this case and an additional assumption is required. The “repeata-
bility hypothesis” of von Neumann leads to the following expression for
the joint probability distribution of the repeated quantum measurements
μ
ˆE,ˆF
ˆS (i, j)= TrˆSˆEi ˆFj ˆEi . (3.18)
If ˆE and ˆF are compatible, then these probabilities do not depend on
the order of measurements and are equal to the probabilities for the joint
measurement TrˆSˆE
i ˆFj . If ˆE= ˆF then μ
ˆE,ˆF
ˆS (i, j)= 0 for i ̸=j, which
explains the term “repeatability hypothesis” . In the general case of in-
compatible measurements μ
ˆE,ˆF
ˆS ̸=μ
ˆF,ˆE
ˆS , re/g193ecting impossibility to give
an objective meaning to the joint probability distribution. Notice also that
for a given observableˆX the distribution (3.18) in general depends on the
choice of its measurement ˆE.
The relation (3.18) can be directly generalized to the case of arbitrary
number of repeated measurements. For example, for three measurements
μ
ˆE,ˆF,ˆG
ˆS (i, j, k)= TrˆSˆEi ˆFj ˆGk ˆFj ˆEi. (3.19)
The unpublished von Neumann’s argument mentioned in the remark of
Wigner was just about the possibility of reproducing the statistics of re-
peated quantum measurements. That remark concerns the case of spin-
1/2 particle which is described by two-dimensional Hilbert space H and
the spin components are 2× 2−matrices.
“... Rather, V on Neumann often discussed the measurement of the
spin component of a spin-J particle in various directions. Clearly, the
probabilities for the two possible outcomes of a single such measurement
can be easily accounted for by hidden variables (see, e.g., the rest of the
present section or the more speci/g192c discussion on page 448 of Bell’s ar-
ticle, Reference 2). However, V on Neumann felt that this is not the case
for many consecutive measurements of the spin component in various
different directions. The outcome of the /g192rst such measurement restricts

295 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
the range of values which the hidden parameters must have had before
that /g192rst measurement was undertaken. The restriction will be present
also after the measurement so that the probability distribution of the hid-
den variables characterizing the spin will be different for particles for
which the measurement gave a positive result from that of the particles
for which the measurement gave a negative result. The range of the hid-
den variables will be further restricted in the particles for which a second
measurement of the spin component, in a different direction, also gave a
positive result. A great number of consecutive measurements will select
particles the hidden variables of which are all so closely alike that the
spin component has, with a high probability, a de/g192nite sign in all direc-
tions. However, according to quantum mechanical theory, no such state is
possible. Schr ¨odinger raised the objection against this argument that the
measurement of a spin component in one direction, while possibly spec-
ifying some hidden variables, may restore a random distribution of some
other hidden variables. It is this writer’s impression that V on Neumann
did not accept Schr ¨odinger’s objection. His point was that the objection
presupposed hidden variables in the apparatus used for the measurement.
V on Neumann’s argument needs to assume only two apparata, with per-
pendicular magnetic /g192elds, and a succession of measurements alternating
between the two apparata. Eventually, even the hidden variables of both
apparata will be /g192xed by the outcomes of many subsequent measurements
of the spin component in their respective directions so that the whole sys-
tem’s hidden variables will be /g192xed. V on Neumann did not publish this
apparent refutation of Schr¨odinger’s objection.”
Let us see how one should change the state in a hidden variable model
of Section 2.2 to reproduce the outcomes of the repeated measurements.
For simplicity we restrict to pure states and maximal measurements. If in
the state ω
′one performs the measurement ˆE and then the measurement
ˆF then according to (3.18) the probability of the outcome(i, j) is equal to
μ
ˆE,ˆF
ω′(i, j)=|⟨ψω′|ei⟩|2 ⏐
⏐⟨e
i| f j⟩
⏐
⏐
2
,
where{ei} ,
{
f j
}
are the bases determining the measurements ˆE, ˆF.O n e
can see that such values of the probabilities will be ensured if after the
/g192rst measurement the initial pointω=
⎫
ω
′,ω′′⎬
of the phase space will
go into the point(ˆEi,ω′′) under the condition that the outcome of the /g192rst
measurement was i, i.e. if λˆE = πˆE(ω′′) satis/g192es the inequality
i−1∑
k=1
|⟨ψω′|ei⟩|2 <λ ˆE ≤
i∑
k=1
|⟨ψω′|ei⟩|2 .

296 Alexander Holevo
The change of the componentω′is thus a controlled Markov process. We
also have to describe the change ω′′→˜ω′′. If the second measurement
is the same as the /g192rst one, then (3.18) implies that its outcome should
coincide with the outcome of the /g192rst measurement. To ensure this it
should be π
ˆE(˜ω′′) = πˆE(ω′′) i.e. the “roulette” corresponding to the
measurement ˆE should preserve its state after the /g192rst measurement. It
is not important what then happens with the other “roulettes” unless they
preserve the uniform distribution.
Consider, however, three repeated measurements ˆE, ˆF, ˆE. According
to (3.19) the probability of the outcome (i, j, k) is equal to
μ
ˆE,ˆF,ˆE
ω′ (i, j, k)=|⟨ψω′|ei⟩|2 ⏐
⏐⟨e
i| f j⟩
⏐
⏐
2 ⏐
⏐⟨f
j|ek⟩
⏐
⏐
2
.
In order to obtain such an expression in the classical model, it is nec-
essary that after the second measurement the probability distribution of
the “roulette” corresponding to the measurementˆE should be completely
renewed, i.e. π
ˆE(ω′′) should become a random variable independent
of the previous values. Since ˆE is arbitrary, this leads to the follow-
ing rule of state change for the roulettes: after a measurement ˆF the
states of all the roulettes λˆE = πˆE(ω′′) with ˆE ̸=ˆF are completely
renewed while λˆF = πˆF(ω′′) preserves its value. This completely cor-
responds to the Schr ¨odinger’s remark. One can check that such a pre-
scription allows to reproduce probabilities for all possible repeated max-
imal measurements. To include not necessarily maximal measurements
one has to extend further the collection of “roulettes” in the classical
descriptions.
The hidden variable ω have the two components, the /g192rst of whichω
′
can be considered as the characteristic of the system itself. The question
– to what corresponds ω
′′– properly to the system or to the measuring
devices is very interesting although it does not give direct arguments con-
tradicting to Schr ¨odinger’s prescription. On one hand it appears natural
to consider λ
ˆE = πˆE(ω′′) as parameters of the measuring device ˆE. In-
teraction of ˆE with the system /g192xes the parameters of the device andλˆE
does not change after the repeated measurementˆE. On the other hand, the
totality of all possible measurements ˆE which can be performed over the
system and the corresponding collection of the parameters ω′′= ∏
ˆE λˆE
can be regarded as the characteristic of the whole system, taking into ac-
count that measurement ˆF affects all the parameters λ
ˆE,ˆE̸=ˆF. Here it
is appropriate to remind of Bohr’s saying that in quantum physics “the
interaction between the measuring instruments and the objects forms an
integral part of the phenomena” [155, page 4]. Anyhow we have seen that
there exists a way to de/g192ne the stochastic rule of state change of a classi-

297 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
cal system which allows to reproduce probabilities of repeated quantum
measurements.
In the case of spin-1/2 system this was observed by Clauser [159] in
a discussion which followed the publication of Wigner’s paper. Having
considered the Bell’s model, Clauser proposed a simple rule for state
change due to measurement which in fact uses Schr ¨odinger’s prescrip-
tion and reproduces probabilities of all repeated measurements. In his
answer Wigner raised the following objection which is applicable also
to our model: a hidden variable model should give explanation for state
changes in “mechanistic” i.e. deterministic but not in stochastic terms.
A permanent /g193ow of randomness which is necessary for partial renewal
of the distribution of ω
′′after each measurement is in the con/g193ict with
Liouville type theorem concerning conservation of the phase volume. To
describe such a permanent renewal, a radical increase of dimensionality
is required. Let us explain this on the simplest example of a sequence of
independent random variables{X
i} with values in R. To describe it as a
dynamical system with an invariant measure one has to pass to the tra-
jectory space R
Z. The stochastic renewal of the state of one dimensional
system can be represented as a mechanical evolution only in the in/g192nite
dimensional space of sequences.
The comment of Wigner is concluded with explanation that “all
schemes of hidden parameters which either V on Neumann himself, or
anyone else whom he knew, could think of and which reproduced the
probabilities of outcomes of several successive measurements of the spin
directions, had some feature which made it unattractive, in fact unreason-
able” and “this was the true reason for his (von Neumann’s) conviction
of the inadequacy of the theories of hidden variables”.
Thus the requirement of reproducing the results of repeated measure-
ments in a hidden variable theory seems to lead to unappealing construc-
tions which evoke negative emotions both from physicists and mathe-
maticians. However no de/g192nite results which would close search in this
direction were obtained. After publication of Bell’s works the edge of
investigations shifted to a different aspect of the hidden variable problem
related to the description of composite systems
4.
3.4. Compositesystems,EPRparadoxandtheBellinequality
The most important physical applications of the mathematical apparatus
of quantum mechanics concern the special features of interactions of
4 Recently there was a revival of interest to noncontextual hidden variables due to discovery of tests
for noncontextuality, including experimental work (see [169, 183] and the references therein).

298 Alexander Holevo
microobjects which have no place in the classical physics. Nevertheless
the /g192rst step in the quantum mechanical description interaction follows
the classical pattern. Namely, one starts from a collection of noninter-
acting “single” components and then the interaction is described in terms
of this composite system. Thus speaking about interaction one deals not
so much with a model for single system, but rather with a category of
these models equipped with the operation of product de/g192ning the rule
for making a composite system. In classical mechanics one considers
(symplectic) phase spaces with the operation of Cartesian product, while
in quantum mechanics – the Hilbert spaces with the operation of tensor
product.
In our discussion of this operation, for simplicity, we will not take into
account additional complications related to possible indistinguishability
of particles. One calls by tensor product of the vector ψ
1 ∈ H1 with
the components[ψi
1] and the vector ψ2 ∈ H2 with the components[ψ j
2]
the vector ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 with the components [ψi
1ψ j
2] which is conveniently
represented by the matrix. The space H1 ⊗ H2 consists of all possible
linear combinations (superpositions) of vectors of the form ψ1⊗ ψ2, i.e.
of all complex matrices [ψij] . Consider a pure state of the composite
system de/g192ned by a unit vectorψ ∈ H1 ⊗ H2. There is a lot of vectors
which cannot be written in the form ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 corresponding to the case
where the /g192rst and the second components are in the uniquely de/g192ned
pure states. Most of the vectors ψ are superpositions of such vectors.
For a superposition it is not possible to separate uniquely the /g192rst and
the second components of the composite system. These unfactorizable
entangled states represent a holistic entity in which the components ex-
ists, as one is accustomed to say, virtually. This re/g193ects the property of
quantum nonseparability.
At a /g192rst glance it looks unclear how such a merging of the components
could happen before the interaction of the subsystems. The explanation is
that preparation of an entangled pure state of a composite system assumes
preliminary interaction between the components. Indeed, any vector ψ
can be obtained from factorizable one ψ
1 ⊗ ψ2 by action of a unitary
operator U in H1 ⊗ H2 so that ψ = U(ψ1 ⊗ ψ2). Then the prepara-
tion consists of the interaction described by the operator U. As distinct
from the classical mechanics where state preparation can be described
in purely kinematical terms, preparation of many quantum mechanical
states requires a dynamical interaction.
Consider from this point of view the hidden variable model of Sec-
tion 2.2. Since the set of pure states of the composite system /Omega1
′is larger
than Cartesian product /Omega1′
1
× /Omega1′
2
, where /Omega1′
j is the set of pure states of
the j−th component, the phase space of the classical description of the

299 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
composite system will be larger than the product of phase spaces for the
components: /Omega1
1 × /Omega12 ⊊ /Omega1.Therefore this classical description is not a
correspondence between the categories of classical and quantum system
preserving the operation of forming the composite systems.
Moreover, it appears that there is no way to establish such a corre-
spondence. In any classical description of a composite quantum system
the variables corresponding to observables of the components are nec-
essarily entangled in the way unusual for classical subsystems. To give
exact formulation, notice that observables corresponding to the /g192rst and
the second components have the form ˆX = ˆX
1 ⊗ ˆI2, ˆY = ˆI1 ⊗ ˆY2,
where ˆX1 is operator in H1, ˆY2 operator in H2 and ˆI j are the unit oper-
ators in Hj. Certainly ˆXˆY = ˆY ˆX so that ˆX, ˆY are compatible, but they
have even stronger property of algebraic independence: if f (ˆX)= g(ˆY)
then f (ˆX)= g(ˆY)= cˆI (such a property is not satis/g192ede.g.by the com-
muting variables ˆX and ˆX2 with ˆX2 ̸=cˆI ).
Proposition3.6. There is no classical description for a composite quan-
tum system in the spaceH1⊗H2 satisfying (E.1), (X.2) and the following
separability condition:
(X.6) for any observables ˆX1,..., ˆXn of the /g192rst subsystem andˆY1,...,
ˆYm of the second subsystem there are random variables X1,..., Xn;
Y1,..., Ym such that X i → ˆXi, Yj → ˆYj and X i Yj → ˆXi ˆYj .
It will be shown that there is no such a description already forn= m= 2.
Notice that the conditions (X.0) or (S.0) of one-to-one correspondence
are not required here. The proposition means that while for any pairˆX, ˆY ,
where ˆX (respectively ˆY ) refers to the /g192rst (respectively to the second)
system, it is always possible to /g192ndX, Y such that X → ˆX, Y → ˆY and
XY → ˆXˆY (this follows from the possibility to satisfy the product rule
(X.4)), it is impossible to do it in the way that Y would be the same for
all choices of ˆX and X – the same for all ˆY. The expression ˆXˆY enters
into the correlation ⣨
ˆXˆY
⟩
= TrˆSˆXˆY (3.20)
of the outcomes of joint measurements of ˆX and ˆY. Thus to reproduce
the quantum mechanical correlations between the subsystems, a hidden
variable theory should possess the following strange property: the ob-
servation method for an observable of the second subsystem ˆY should
necessarily depend on which ˆX is observed over the /g192rst subsystem.
Proof. The proof is based on Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt inequality
which is a version of the famous Bell inequality [160]. Assume that one

300 Alexander Holevo
can satisfy the condition (X.6) with n= m= 2 and let us prove that for
all observables ˆX1, ˆX2 of the /g192rst component and all observablesˆY1, ˆY2
of the second, with the outcomes in [−1, 1] , the correlations (3.20) sat-
isfy ⏐
⏐
⏐
⣨
ˆX
1 ˆY1
⟩
+
⣨
ˆX1 ˆY2
⟩
+
⣨
ˆX2 ˆY1
⟩
−
⣨
ˆX2 ˆY2
⟩⏐
⏐
⏐≤ 2. (3.21)
By the assumptions (E.1), (X.6) it is suf/g192cient to prove this for correla-
tions of classical random variables X
1 (ω) , X2 (ω) , Y1 (ω) , Y2 (ω) given
by
⟨XY⟩=
∫
/Omega1
S (dω) X (ω) Y (ω) .
But taking into account the spectral condition (X.2) one has |X j|≤
1, |Yk|≤1; j, k= 1, 2, which implies
|X1Y1+X1Y2+X2Y1−X2Y2|≤| Y1+Y2|+|Y1−Y2|≤2 max{| Y1|,|Y2|}≤ 2,
hence−2 ≤ X1Y1 + X1Y2 + X2Y1 − X2Y2 ≤ 2, whence, taking the
expectation, one obtains the required inequality.
It remains to show that in any composite quantum system one can /g192nd
observables ˆX1, ˆX2; ˆY1, ˆY2 and the stateˆS violating the inequality (3.21).
For this consider /g192rst the system of two distinguishable spin-1/2 particles
so that H1 and H2 are two-dimensional. Denote by ˆX(⃗a) the spin observ-
able in the direction ⃗a =
⎫
ax, ay, az
⎬
for the /g192rst particle and byˆY(⃗b) –
the spin observable in the direction⃗b for the second particle. In the basis
|↑⟩=
[1
0
]
,|↓⟩=
[0
1
]
one has
ˆX(⃗a)=
[ a
z ax − ia y
ax + ia y −az
]
,
and similarly for ˆY(⃗b). Consider the entangled pure state ˆSψ of the com-
posite system given by the vector
|ψ⟩=1√
2
[
|↑⟩⊗|↓⟩−|↓⟩⊗|↑⟩
]
. (3.22)
A simple calculation shows that
⟨ψ|σ(⃗a)⊗ σ(⃗b)|ψ⟩=−⃗a·⃗b. (3.23)
If one chooses the four vectors⃗aj,⃗bk,( j, k= 1, 2) as shown on Fig. 6.3,
then the correlations between ˆX(⃗aj) and ˆY(⃗bk) give the value 2
√
2 for
the left side of (3.21), which breaks the inequality.

301 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
π
4
b2⃗
b1⃗
a2⃗
a1⃗
Figure6.3. Choice of⃗a j and⃗bk.
For an arbitrary composite quantum systemH1⊗ H2 one can always take
the two-dimensional subspaces of H1 and H2 to build this construction
which proves the Proposition in the general case.
The underlying case of two spatially separated particles has quite im-
portant physical consequences. This was realized already in 1935 after
publication of the paper of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (EPR) [162] in
the subsequent discussion on completeness of quantum mechanics (con-
sidering entangled state of two spin-1 /2 particles was proposed later by
Bohm). EPR believed that their argument shows “incompleteness” of
quantum mechanical description. The argument of Bell shifts the accent
substantially: if the quantum mechanical description is correct then any
attempt to “complete” it with hidden variables leads necessarily to con-
tradiction with the physical principle of locality. Assume that H
1 and H2
describe spin degrees of freedom of two spin-1/2 particles located in spa-
tially separated domains. Quantum mechanics implies existence of states
for such a system in which the spins are entangled as in (3.22). More-
over, such a state in principle can be realized experimentally as a product
of decay of a spin-zero system.
Now assume that a joint measurement is performed for the spin of the
/g192rst particle in the direction⃗a and the spin of the second particle in the di-
rection⃗b. After a long series of independent repetitions the experimenter
computes statistical estimates for the correlation betweenˆX(⃗a) and ˆY(⃗b).
Consider the following three statements:
I the correct values for the correlations are given by the quantum me-
chanical formula (3.20);
II there is a classical description of the composite quantum system sat-
isfying the spectral condition i.e. preserving the “objective values”
of observables;

302 Alexander Holevo
III “the real factual situation of the system S1 is independent of what
is done with the system S2, which is spatially separated from the
former”.
The last property is the Einstein locality [162] or separability [163] re-
lated to the principle “no instantaneous action at a distance”. Notice that
the property (III) has an unambiguous meaning only in the classical pic-
ture i.e. under the condition (II). The classical description satisfying the
requirement (III) is called a local hidden variable theory or “local real-
ism”. The Bell argument shows that the properties (I)-(III) are incom-
patible i.e. a local hidden variable theory reproducing the statistical
predictions of quantum mechanics does not exist. This can be considered
as modern interpretation of the “EPR paradox” .
Moreover, the Bell type inequalities in principle open a possibility
for experimental test: quantum mechanics versus local hidden variable
theory. A practical implementation of such experiments is however ag-
gravated by several possible loopholes and requires great efforts. The
famous Aspect’s experiment performed in 1981-1982 showed the agree-
ment with quantum mechanical formula for correlations. After that there
was a continuing series of experiments with similar conclusions while
a couple of them claimed possible agreement with the Bell inequality
[160, 194]. However the question is not closed because of the high price
of rejecting the “realistic” description of the Nature [163].
We are not speaking of defenders of the naive realism who would be
happy with a pictorial image of the microworld as something similar to
the world directly accessible to the human perception where mechanis-
tic idealizations like a material point still have sense. They continue at-
tempts to /g192nd a gap in the argument leading to the conclusion that any
local hidden variable theory cannot reproduce the statistical predictions
of quantum theory concerning correlations between the parts of a com-
posite quantum system. It should be noticed that while the Bell inequality
as such is elementary, the logic of its application in the hidden variable
problem is far from trivial; any critique of Bell’s argument with its sub-
sequent re/g192nements, however it might seem sophisticated, sooner or later
was found based on a misunderstanding. A critical survey of recent dis-
cussions and different opinions is given in the article [164] where in par-
ticular a proof is given of a Bell inequality taking into account /g192niteness
of the sample and possibility of arbitrary local correlations between the
subsequent experiments.
What is really disturbing is the apparent impossibility of a peaceful co-
existence of quantum mechanics and “local realistic” theory such as gen-
eral relativity (which was in fact the motivation of Einstein’s concern).

303 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Admitting a local hidden variable theory would mean that quantum me-
chanics is limited at least in some of its most basic predictions which
would be quite an extraordinary development. Some compromise has to
be found if one believes in the possibility of uni/g192ed quantum theory of
interactions including gravitation.
On the other hand, macroscopic or at least mesoscopic manifestations
of the entanglement are critically important for the future technological
implementations of the new quantum information processing protocols
including quantum computation.
Therefore much attention is paid to close possible logical loopholes in
the actual Bell-test experiments. The most signi/g192cant one is thedetection
loophole which still exists after almost 40 years of experimental research.
Soon after appearance of Bell’s work it was recognized that the inequal-
ity can be violated in local hidden variable models with post-selection
with a positive probability of failure for the particle detection if the “no
detection” outcomes are just neglected. A simple explicit local hidden
variable model for such correlation experiment with two spin-1/2 parti-
cles was demonstrated by N. Gisin and B. Gisin [167] implying in partic-
ular that experiments with the detector ef/g192ciency below 75% cannot be
considered as decisive. Therefore researchers continue to improve exper-
imental techniques and search for the more sensitive inequalities [187].
Nowadays theoretical study of the Bell-type inequalities providing quan-
titative boarders between “classical” and “quantum” is one of the topics
in the modern quantum information theory with applications to quan-
tum cryptography, entanglement detection, multipartite interactive proof
systems, communication complexity etc., see [181] and the references
therein. However these exciting subjects are already beyond the scope of
the present essay.



References
[1] L. A CCARDI ,A .F RIGERIO and J. T. L EWIS , “Quantum Sto-
chastic Processes”, Publ. RIMS Kioto University 18 (1982), 97-
133.
[2] N. I. A KHIEZER and I. M. G LAZMAN , “Theory of Linear Oper-
ators in Hilbert Space”, Ungar, New York, 1963; 2 nd Russian ed.
Nauka, Moscow, 1966.
[3] G. R. A LLCOCK , The time of arrival in quantum mechanics, Ann.
Physics53 (1969), 253–348.
[4] E. M. A LFSEN , “Compact Convex Sets and Boundary Integrals”,
Ergebnisse der Mathematik 57, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
[5] W. O. A MREIN , Localizability for particles of mass zero , Helv.
Phys. Acta42 (1) (1969), 149–190.
[6] V. B ERGMANN , On unitary ray representations of continuous
groups, Ann. of Math.,59 (1) (1954), 1–46.
[7] V. B ARGMANN , On a Hilbert space of analytic functions and an
associated integral transform, I, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 14 (3)
(1961), 187–214.
[8] V. B ARGMANN , Note on Wigner’s theorem on symmetry opera-
tions, J. Math. Phys.5 (1964), 862–868.
[9] H. B AUER , Minimalstellen von Functionen und Extremalpunkte ,
Arch. Math.9 (1958), 389–393.
[10] F. J. B ELINFANTE , “A Survery of Hidden Variables Theories”,
Pergamon Press, New York, 1973.
[11] J. B ELL , On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechan-
ics, Rev. Modern Phys.38 (1966), 447–452.
[12] F. A. B EREZIN , “The Method of Second Quantization”, Nauka,
Moscow, 1965, (R).
§ The year of the /g192rst edition is indicated in brackets for some monographs. (R) indicates a work in
the Russian language.

306 Alexander Holevo
[13] D. I. B LOKHINTZEV , “Fundamentals of Quantum Mechanics
(Vys/g225saja shkola, Moscow, 1961, (R).
[14] D. I. B LOKHINTZEV , “Fundamental Questions of Quantum Me-
chanics, Nauka, Moscow, 1966, (R).
[15] N. N. B OGOLJUBOV , “Lectures on the Theory of Symmetry of
Elementary Particles, Moscow State University, Moscow, 1966,
(R).
[16] N. N. B
OGOLJUBOV ,AA .L OGUNOV and I. T. T ODOROV , “In-
troduction to Axiomatic Quantum Field Theory, Benjamin, New
York, 1975; Russian ed.: Nauka, Moscow, 1969.
[17] D. B
OHM , “Quantum Theory”, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, 1951.
[18] N. B OHR , “Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Wiley, New
York, 1958.
[19] V. B B RAGINSKIJ and Y U.I .V ORONTZOV , Quantum-mecha-
nical limitations in macroscopic experiments and contemporary
experimental technique, Uspehi Fiz. Nauk114 (1974), 41–53 (R).
[20] P. C
ARRUTHERS a n dM .M .NIETO , Phase and angle variables in
quantum mechanics, Rev. Modern Phys.40 (2) (1968), 411–440.
[21] D. C ASTLER , The C∗-algebras of a free Boson /g192eld, Comm. Math.
Phys.1 (1) (1965), 14–48.
[22] N. N. C HENTZOV , “Statistical Decision Rules and Optimal Infer-
ence”, Translations of Mathematical Monographs; 53, American
Mathematical Society, 1982; (1972) (R).
[23] H. C RAMER , “Mathematical Methods of Statistics”, Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1946.
[24] C. D. C USHEN and R. L. H UDSON , A quantum mechanical cen-
tral limit theorem, J. Appl. Probab.8 (1971), 454–469.
[25] A. D ANERI ,A .L OINGER and G. M. P ROSPERI , Quantum theory
of measurement and the ergodicity conditions , Nuclear Phys. 33
(1962), 297–319.
[26] E. B. D A VIES, On repeated measurements of continuous observ-
ables in quantum mechanics, J. Funct. Anal.6 (1970), 318–346.
[27] E. B. D A VIES, “Quantum Theory of Open Systems”, Academic
Press, London, 1976.
[28] E. B. D A VIES, Quantum communication systems, IEEE Trans. In-
form. Theory IT23 (7) (1977), 530-534.
[29] E. B. D A VIES a n dJ .T .LEWIS , An operational approach to quan-
tum probability, Comm. Math. Phys.17 (3) (1970), 239–260.
[30] P. A. M. D IRAC , “The Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, 4th ed.,
Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1958, (1930).

307 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
[31] N. D UNFORD a n dJ .T .S CHW ARTZ, “Linear Operators”, part 1,
Interscience, New York, 1958.
[32] H. E KSTEIN and A. J. F. S IEGERT , On a reinterpretation of decay
experiments, Ann. Physics68 (1971), 509–520.
[33] G. G. E MCH , “Algebraic Methods in Statistical Mechanics and
Quantum Field Theory”, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1972.
[34] T. S. F ERGUSON , “Mathematical Statistics: a Decision Theoretic
Approach”, Academic Press, New York, 1967.
[35] R. P. F EYNMANN , Concept of probability in quantum mechan-
ics, Proc. 2nd Berkeley Symp. on Math. Stat. and Probab. Berkeley
(1951), 533–541.
[36] R. P. F EYNMANN ,R .B .L EIGHTON and M. S ANDS , “Quantum
Mechanics”, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1965.
[37] V. A. F OCK , “Fundamentals of Quantum Mechanics, Nauka,
Moscow, 1976, 1932, (R).
[38] V. A. F OCK , On the interpretation of quantum mechanics, Uspehi
Fiz. Nauk62 (4) (1957), 461–474, (R).
[39] D. G ABOR , Communication theory and physics, Phil. Mag. 41
(1950), 1161-1197.
[40] I. M. G ELFAND and N. Y A.V ILENKIN , “Some Applications of
Harmonic Analysis, Fitzmatgiz, Moscow, 1961, (R).
[41] I. M. G ELFAND ,R .A .M INLOS and Z. Y A.S HAPIRO , “Repre-
sentations of the Rotation Group and the Lorentz Group”, Fizmat-
giz, Moscow, 1958, (R).
[42] R. J. G
LAUBER , The quantum theory of optical coherence , Phys.
Rev.130 (1963), 2529–2539.
[43] B. V. G NEDENKO , “The Theory of Probability”, Chelsea, New
York, 1962; 5rh Russian ed. Nauka, Moscow, 1969.
[44] J. P. G ORDON and W. LOUISELL , Simultaneous measurements of
non-commuting observables, In: “Physics of Quantum electron-
ics”, P. Kelley, M. Lax and B. Tannenwold (eds.), McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1966, 833–840.
[45] V. G
ORINI ,A .F RIGERIO ,M .V ERRI ,A .K OSSAKOWSKI and
E. C. G. S UDARSHAN , Properties of quantum Markovian equan-
tions, Rep. Math. Phys.13 (3) (1978), 149–173.
[46] S. G UDDER , Convex structures and operational quantum mechan-
ics, Comm. Math. Phys.29 (3) (1973), 249–264.
[47] P. R. H ALMOS , “Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces”, 2nd ed. Van
Nostrand, Princeton, NJ, 1958.
[48] P. R. H ALMOS , “A Hilbert Space Problem Book”, Van Nostrand,
Princeton, NJ, 1967.

308 Alexander Holevo
[49] A. H ARTK ¨AMPER , Axiomatics of preparing and measuring pro-
cesses, In: “Foundations of Quantum Mechanics and Ordered Lin-
ear Spaces”, Lecture Notes in Phys.29 (1974), 107–115.
[50] C. W. H ELSTROM , Detection theory and quantum mechanics, In-
form. and Control10 (3) (1967), 254–291.
[51] C. W. H ELSTROM , Minimum mean-square error estimation in
quantum statistics, Phys. Let.25A (1967), 101–102.
[52] C. W. H ELSTROM , Estimation of a displacement parameter of a
quantum system, Internat. J. Theoret. Phys. 11 (6) (1974), 357–
378.
[53] C. W. H ELSTROM , “Quantum Detection and Estimation Theory”,
Academic Press, New York, 1976.
[54] K. H EPP , Quantum theory of measurement and macroscopic ob-
servables, Helv. Phys. Acta45 (1972), 237–248.
[55] A. S. H OLEVO , On quantum characteristic functions , Problemy
Pereda/g225ci Informacii6 (4) (1970), 44–48, (R).
[56] A. S. H OLEVO , Towards a mathematical theory of quantum com-
munication channels, Problemy Pereda /g225ci Informacii8 (1) (1972),
63–71, (R).
[57] A. S. H OLEVO , An analog of the statistical decision theory
in the noncommutative probability theory , Trudy Moscow, Mat.
Ob/g225s/g225c,26(1972), 133–149, (R), AMS Trans. (1974).
[58] A. S. H OLEVO , Statistical problems in quantum physics ,2 nd
Japan-USSR Symp. on Probability Theory, Kyoto 1 (1972), 22–
40.
[59] A. S. H OLEVO , Statistical decision theory for quantum systems,J .
Multivariate Anal.3 (4) (1973), 337–394.
[60] A. S. H OLEVO , Information-theoretic aspects of quantum mea-
surement, Problemy Pereda/g225ci Informacii9 (2) (1973), 31–42, (R).
[61] A. S. H OLEVO , Optimal quantum measurements, Teoret. Mat. Fiz.
13 (3) (1973), 184–199, (R).
[62] A. S. H OLEVO , Some statistical problems for quantum Gaussian
states, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory IT21 (5) (1975), 533–543.
[63] A. S. H OLEVO , Noncommutative analogs of the Cramer-Rao in-
equality in the quantum measurement theory ,3 nd Soviet-Japan
Symp. on Probability Theory, Trashkent, 1975, Lecture Notes in
Math.550 (1976), 194–222.
[64] A. S. H
OLEVO , Investigations in the general theory of statistical
decision, Proceedings of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics124
(1976), (R), AMS Transl.3 (1978).

309 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
[65] A. S. H OLEVO , Commutation superoperator of a state and its ap-
plications in the noncommutative statistics , Rep. Math. Phys. 12
(2) (1977), 251–271.
[66] A. S. H OLEVO , Estimation of a shift parameter of a quantum
state, Rep. Math. Phys.13 (3) (1978), 287–307.
[67] A. S. H OLEVO , Covariant measurements and uncertainty rela-
tions, Rep. Maht. Phys.16 (3) (1979), 385–400.
[68] W. H UNZIKER , A note on symmetry operations in quantum me-
chanics, Helv. Phys. Acta45 (2) (1972), 233–236.
[69] R. S. I NGARDEN , Quantum information theory, Rep. Math. Phys.
10 (1) (1976), 43–72.
[70] E. I N ¨ONU and E. P. W IGNER , Representations of the Galilei
group, Nuovo Cimento9 (1952), 705–718.
[71] J. M. J AUCH , “Foundations of Quantum Mechanics”, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA, 1968.
[72] J. M. J AUCH and C. P IRON , Generalized localizability , Helv.
Phys. Acta45 (1967), 559-570.
[73] D. J UDGE , On the uncertainty relation for angle variables, Nuovo
Cimento31 (1964), 332–340.
[74] R. V. K ADISON , Transformation of states in operator theory and
dynamics, Topology3 (suppl.) (1965), 177–198.
[75] A. A. K IRILLOV , “Elements of the Representation Theory”,
Nauka, Moscow, 1978, (R).
[76] J. R. K LAUDER and E. C. G. S UDARSHAN , “Fundamentals of
Quantum Optics”, Benjamin, New York, 1968.
[77] S. K OCHEN and E. P. SPECKER , The problem of hidden variables
in quantum mechanics, J. Math. Mech.17 (1) (1967), 59–88.
[78] A. N. K OLMOGOROV , “Foundations of the Theory of Probabil-
ity”, Chelsea, New York, 1950, (1933).
[79] A. N. K OLMOGOROV , “Theory of the Information Transmission”,
USSR Academy of Sciences Press, Moscow, 1957, (R).
[80] K. K RAUS , Operations and effects in the Hilbert space formula-
tion of quantum theory , In: “Foundations of quantum mechanics
and ordered linear space”, Lecture Notes in Phys.29 (1974), 206–
229.
[81] K. K RAUS and J. S CHR ¨OTER , Expectation values of unbounded
observables, Internat. J. Theoret. Phys.7 (6) (1973), 431–442.
[82] U. K RAUSE , The inner orthogonality of convex sets in axiomatic
quantum mechanics, In: “Foundations of quantum mechanics and
ordered linear spaces”, Lecture Notes in Phys.29 (1974), 269–280.

310 Alexander Holevo
[83] N. S. K RYLOV and V. A. F OCK , On the main two interpretations
of the “time-energy” uncertainty relation, JETP17 (2) (1947), 93–
107, (R).
[84] L. L ANZ ,L .A .L UGIATO and G. R AMELLA , On the quantum
mechanical treatment of decaying non-relativistic systems , Inter-
nat. J. Theoret. Phys.8 (5) (1973), 341–352.
[85] G. L INDBLAD , Entropy, information and quantum measurements,
Comm. Math. Phys.33 (4) (1973), 305–322.
[86] J. L. L OPES and M. P ATY (eds.), “Quantum Mechanics: a
Half Century Later”, Reidel Publ. Company, Doredrecht-Holland,
1977.
[87] W. L
OUISELL , Amplitude and phase uncertainty relations , Phys.
Lett.7 (1963), 60–61.
[88] W. L OUISELL , “Radiation and Noise in Quantum Electronics”,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1964.
[89] G. L OUPIAS and S. M IRACLE -SOL ´E, C∗-alg`ebre des syst `emes
canoniques, Comm. Math. Phys.2 (1) (1966), 31–42.
[90] G. L UDWIG , Measuring and preparing process, In: “Foundations
of quantum mechanics and ordered linear spaces”, Lecture Notes
in Phys.29 (1974), 122–161.
[91] G. W. M
ACKEY , Imprimitivity for representations of locally com-
pact groups, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.35 (4) (1949), 537–545.
[92] G. W. M ACKEY , “Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Me-
chanics”, Benjamin, New York, 1963.
[93] I. A M ALKIN and V. I. M AN ’KO, “Dynamical Symmetries and
Coherent States of Quantum Systems”, Nauka, Moscow, 1979,
(R).
[94] A. I M
ALTZEV , “Fundamentals of Linear Algebra”, Nauka,
Moscow, 1970, (R).
[95] L. I. M ANDELSTAM , “Lectures on Optics, Relativity and Quan-
tum Mechanics”, Nauka, Moscow, 1972, (1939), (R).
[96] L. I. M ANDELSTAM and I. E. T AMM , “Time-energy” uncertainty
relation in the non-relativistic quantum mechanics , Izv. Acad.
Nauk SSSR Ser. Fiz.9 (1-2) (1945), 122-128, (R).
[97] J. M ANUCEAU and A. V ERBEURE , Quasifree states of the CCR,
Comm. Math. Phys.9 (4) (1968), 293–302.
[98] K. V. M ARDIA , “Statistics of Directional Data”, Academic Press,
New York, 1972.
[99] J. E. M OYAL, Quantum mechanics as a statistical theory, Proc.
Camb. Phil. Soc.45 (1949), 99–124.

311 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
[100] M. A. N AIMARK , On the self-adjoint extensions of the second
kind of a symmetric operator , Izv. Acad. Nauk SSR ser. Mat. 4
(1) (1940), 53–104, (R).
[101] M. A. N AIMARK , Spectral functions of a symmetric operator, Izv.
Acad. nauk SSSR Ser. Mat.4 (3) (1940), 277–318 (R).
[102] E. N ELSON , Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation from Newto-
nian mechanics, Phys, Rev.150 (4) (1966), 1079–1085.
[103] E. N ELSON , “Dynamical Theories of Brownian Motion”, Prince-
ton, NJ, 1967.
[104] H. N EUMANN , The structure of ordered Banach spaces in ax-
iomatic quantum mechanics , In: “Foundations of Quantum Me-
chanics and Ordered Linear spaces”, Lecture Notes in Phys. 29
(1974), 116–121.
[105] T. D N EWTON and E. P. WIGNER , Localized states for elementary
systems, Rev. Modern Phys.21 (1949), 400–406.
[106] M. O ZAW A, Optimal measurements for general quantum systems,
Rep. Math. Phys. (1980).
[107] W. P AULI , “General Principles of Wave Mechanics”, Encyclopae-
dia of Phys. v. 5/1, Spinger-Verlag, Berlin, 1965.
[108] A. M P ERELOMOV , Coherent states for arbitrary Lie groups ,
Comm. Math. Phys.26 (3) (1972), 222–236.
[109] A. M P ERELOMOV , Generalized coherent states and some of their
applications, Uspehi Fiz. Nauk123 (1) (1977), 23–53, (R).
[110] C. P IRON , Axiomatique quantique , Helv. Phys. Acta 37 (4-5)
(1964), 439–468.
[111] L. S. P OLAK (ed.), “50 Years of Quantum Mechanics”, Nauka,
Moscow, 1979, (R).
[112] G. P OLY Aand G. SZEG ¨O, “Aufgaben und Lehrsatze aus der Anal-
ysis”, Band II, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1925.
[113] L. S. P ONTRJAGIN , “Continuous Groups”, Nauka, Moscow, 1970,
(R).
[114] J. C. T P OOL , Mathematical aspects of Weyl correspondence ,J .
Math. Phys.7 (1) (1966), 66–76.
[115] E. P RUGOVE /g225CKI , On a theory of measurement of incompatible
observables in quantum mechanics, Canad. J. Phys.45 (6) (1967),
2173–2219.
[116] C. R. P UTNAM , “Commutation Properties of Hilbert Space Oper-
ators and Related Topics”, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1967.
[117] J. M. R ADCLIFFE , Some properties of coherent spin states ,J .
Phys.A4 (1971), 313–323.

312 Alexander Holevo
[118] M. R EED and B. S IMON , “Methods of Modern Mathematical
Physics”, V ol. 1, “Function Analysis”, Academic Press, New York,
1972.
[119] F. R
IESZ and B. S Z.-NAGY, “Lecons d’Analyse Fonctionnelle”,
Academiai Kiado, Budapest, 1972, 1952.
[120] H. P. R OBERTSON , The uncertainty principle , Phys. Rev. 34 (1)
(1929), 163–164.
[121] R. T. R OCKAFELLAR , “Convex Analysis”, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1970.
[122] R. S CHATTEN , “Norm Ideals of Completely Continuous Opera-
tors, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1960.
[123] C. Y. S HE and H. H EFFNER , Simultaneous measurements of non-
commuting observables, Phys. Rev.152 (4) (1966), 1103–1110.
[124] Y U.M .S HIROKOV , Group-theoretic consideration of relativistic
quantum mechanics, JETP5 (1957), 1196–1214, (R).
[125] Y U.M .S HIROKOV , Quantum and classical mechanics in the
phase-space representation, Fiz. `Elementarn. /g225Castic i Atom. Jadra
10 (1) (1979), 5–50, (R).
[126] I. S EGAL , A generating functional for the states of a linear Boson
/g192eld, Canad. J. Math.13 (1) (1961), 1–18.
[127] I.S EGAL ,“Mathematical Problems of Relativistic Physics”, AMS,
Providence, RI, 1963.
[128] B. S IMON , “Functional Integration and Quantum Physics”, Aca-
demic Press, New York, 1979.
[129] M. H. S TONE , “Linear Transformations in Hilbert Space and
Their Applications to Analysis”, AMS, Providence, RI, 1932.
[130] R. L. S TRATONOVICH , The quantum generalization of optimal
statistical estimation and testing hypothesis , J. Stoch. 1 (1973),
87–126.
[131] L. S USSKIND and J. G LOGOWER , Quantum mechanical phase
and time operator, Phys.1 (1964), 49–61.
[132] M. T AKESAKI , Tomita’s theory of modular Hilbert algebras, Lec-
ture Notes in Math.128 (1972).
[133] K. U RBANIK , Joint probability distribution of observables in
quantum mechanics, Studia Math.21 (1) (1961), 117–133.
[134] F. V ALENTINE , “Convex Sets”, McGraw Hill, New York, 1964.
[135] V. S. V ARADARAJAN , “Geometry of Quantum Theory”, Van Nos-
trand, New York, 1968.
[136] V. S. VARADARAJAN ,“Geometry of Quantum Theory”, II, “Quan-
tum Theory of Covariant Systems”, Van Nostrand, New York,
1970.

313 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
[137] H. C. V OLKIN , Phase operators and phase relations for photon
states, J. Math. Phys.14 (12) (1973), 1965–1976.
[138] J. VON NEUMANN , “Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Me-
chanics”, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1955, (1932).
[139] J. VON NEUMANN , Die Eidentigkeit der Schr¨odingerschen Oper-
atoren, Math. Ann.104 (3) (1931), 570–578.
[140] A. W ALD , “Statistical Decision Fucntions”, Wiley, New York,
Chapman and Hall, London, 1950.
[141] H. W EYL , “The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics”,
Dover, New York, 1931, (1928).
[142] A. S. W IGHTMAN , On the localizability of quantum mechanical
systems, Rev. Modern Phys.34 (1962), 845–872.
[143] A. S. W IGHTMAN , Hilbert’s sixth problem: mathematical treat-
ment of the axioms of physics , Proc. Symp. in Pure Math. 28 (1)
(1977), 147–240.
[144] E. P. W IGNER , Unitary representations of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group, Ann. Math.40 (1) (1939), 149–204.
[145] E. P. W IGNER , “Group Theory”, Academic Press, New York,
1959.
[146] E. P. W IGNER , On the time-energy uncertainty relation, In: “As-
pects of Quantum Theory”, A. Salam and E. P. Wigner (eds.),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1972.
[147] H. P. H Y
UEN and M. L AX, Multiple-parameter quantum estima-
tion and measurement of non-selfadjoint observables, IEEE Trans.
IT-19 (6) (1973), 740–750.
[148] D. P. /g225Z
ELOBENKO , “Compact Lie Groups and Their Representa-
tions”, Nauka, Moscow, 1970, (R).
[149] U. Z W ANZIGER, Representations of the Lorentz group corre-
sponding to unstable particles , Phys. Rev.131 (6) (1963), 2818–
2819.
Referencesaddedtothesecondedition
[150] A. B ARCHIELLI and M. G REGORATTI , “Quantum Trajectories
and Measurements in Continuous Time. The Diffusive Case”,
Lect. Notes Phys. 782, Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009.
[151] O. E. B
ARNDORFF -NIELSEN ,R .D .G ILL and P. E. J UPP , On
quantum statistical inference, J. Royal Statist. Soc. B, 65 (2003),
1–31.
[152] I. B ENGTSSON and K. /g225ZYCZKOWSKI , “Geometry of Quantum
States: An Introduction to Quantum Entanglement”, Cambridge
University Press, 2006.

314 Alexander Holevo
[153] G. B IRKHOFF and J. VON NEUMANN , The logic of quantum me-
chanics, Ann. Math.37 (1936), 823–843.
[154] D. B OHM , A suggested interpretation of quantum theory in terms
of “hidden variables”, Phys. Rev.85 (1952), 166–174, 180–193.
[155] N. B OHR , “Essays 1958/1962 on Atomic Physics and Human
Knowledge”, Interscience Publishers, New York-London, 1963.
[156] S. L. B RAUNSTEIN , “Squeezing as an irreducible resource”, e-
print quant-ph/9904002.
[157] P. B USCH ,M .G RABOVSKI and P. J. L AHTI , “Operational quan-
tum physics”, Lect. Notes Phys.m31, Springer-Verlag: New York-
Heidelberg-Berlin, 1997.
[158] N. N. C HENTSOV , “Selected works”, Mathematics. Part IV , ge-
ometrostatistics and noncommutative probability, Moscow: Fiz-
matlit, 2001 (R).
[159] J. F. C
LAUSER , Von Neumann’s informal hidden variable argu-
ment, Amer. J. Phys.39 (1971), 1095–1099.
[160] J. F. C LAUSER and A. S HIMONI , Bell’s theorem: experimental
tests and implications, Rep. Progr. Phys.41 (1978), 1881–1928.
[161] G.M.D’A RIANO ,Homodyning as universal detection, In: “Quan-
tum Communication, Computing and Measurement” O. Hirota,
A. S. Holevo, C. M. Caves (eds), New York: Plenum Press, 253–
264, 1997; e-print quant-ph/9701011.
[162] A. E
INSTEIN ,B .P ODOLSKY and N. R OSEN , Can quantum me-
chanical description of physical reality be considered complete? ,
Phys. Rev.47 (1935), 777-780.
[163] B. D’E SPAGNAT, “Veiled Reality”, an Analysis of Present-Day
Quantum-Mechanical Concepts, Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[164] R. D. G ILL . “Time, /g192nite statistics and Bell’s /g192fth position”,
Foundations of Probability and Physics – 2, Vaxjo Univ. Press,
2003, 179–206 (2003); e-print quant-ph/0301059.
[165] R. D. G
ILL and S. MASSAR , State estimation for large ensembles,
Phys. Rev. A61 (2000), 042312/1-16, e-print quant-ph/9902063.
[166] R. G ILL and M. I. G UTA, An invitation to quantum tomography,
e-print quant-ph/0303020.
[167] N. G ISIN and B. G ISIN , A local hidden variable model of quan-
tum correlation exploiting the detection loophole, Phys.Lett.A260
(1999), 323–327; arXiv:quant-ph/9905018.
[168] A. G LEASON , Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert
space, J. Rat. Mech. and Anal.6 (1957), 885–894.
[169] O. G ¨UHNE ,M .K LEINMANN ,A .C ABELLO , J.-A. L ARSSON ,G .
KIRCHMAIR ,F .Z ¨AHRINGER ,R .G ERRITSMA and C. F. R OOS ,

315 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Compatibility and noncontextuality for sequential measurements ,
Phys. Rev.A81 (2010), 022121; arXiv:0912.4846 [quant-ph].
[170] M. G UTA and A. J ENCOV A, Local asymptotic normality in quan-
tum statistics , Communications in Mathematical Physics 276
(2007), 341–379, arXiv:quant-ph/0606213.
[171] A. H ARTK ¨AMPER and H. N EUMANN (eds.), Foundation of quan-
tum mechanics and ordered linear spaces, Advanced Study Insti-
tute, Marburg 1973, Lect. Notes in Phys.29 (1974).
[172] M. H AY ASHI, Asymptotic estimation theory for a /g192nite dimen-
sional pure state model.,J .P h y s .A31(1998), 4633–4655.
[173] M. Hayashi, Two quantum analogues of Fisher information from a
large deviation viewpoint of quantum estimation, J. Phys. A Math.
Gen.35 (2002), 7689–7727, arXiv:quant-ph/0202003.
[174] M. H AY ASHI, “Quantum Information: an Introduction”, Springer,
Berlin, 2006.
[175] F. H IAI and D. P ETZ , The proper formula for relative entropy and
its asymptotics in quantum probability, Commun. Math. Phys.143
(1991), 99–114.
[176] D. H ILBERT ,J . VON NEUMANN and L. N ORDHEIM , Uber die
grundlegen der quantenmechanik, Math. Ann.98 (1927), 1–30.
[177] A. S. H OLEVO , Bounds for generalized uncertainty of shift pa-
rameter, Lect. Notes Math.1021 (1983), 243–251.
[178] A. S. H OLEVO , Statistical structure of quantum theory, Lect.
Notes Phys.m67 Springer, Berlin 2001.
[179] A. S. H OLEVO , “Quantum Systems, Channels, Information”,
Moscow Independent University: Moscow 2010, (R)
[180] P. J ORDAN ,J . VON NEUMANN and E. W IGNER , On an alge-
braic generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism , Ann.
of Math.35 (1) (1934), 29–64.
[181] M. J UNGE ,C .P ALAZUELOS ,D .P EREZ -GARCIA ,I .V ILLA -
NUEV A a n dM .M .W OLF , “Operator Space Theory: a Natural
Framework for Bell Inequalities”, arXiv:0912.1941[quant-ph].
[182] M. K EYL M. and R. F. W ERNER , Estimating the spectrum of a
density operator, Phys. Rev. A64 (5) (2001), 052311.
[183] A. A. K LY ACHKO,M .A .C AN ,S .B INICIOGLU and A. S. S HU -
MOVSKY , A simple test for hidden variables in spin-1 system ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), 020403; arXiv: 0706.0126 [quant-
ph].
[184] U. L EONHARDT , “Measuring the Quantum State of Light”, Cam-
bridge University Press, 1997.

316 Alexander Holevo
[185] A. L ESNIEWSKI and M. B. R USKAI , Monotone Riemannian met-
rics and relative entropy on non-commutative probability spaces ,
J. Math. Phys.40 (1999), 5702–5724.
[186] G. L UDWIG , “Foundations of Quantum Mechanics”, Springer -
Verlag, Berlin, 1983.
[187] S. M ASSAR ,S .P IRONIO ,J .R OLAND and B. GISIN , A zoology of
Bell inequalities resistant to detector inef/g192ciency, Phys. Rev.A66
(2002), 052112; arXiv:quant-ph/0205130.
[188] S. M ASSAR and S. P OPESCU , Optimal extraction of information
from /g192nite quantum ensembles, Phys. Rev. Lett.74 (1995), 1259–
1263.
[189] T. O GAW Aand H. NAGAOKA , Strong converse and Stein’s lemma
in quantum hypothesis testing IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-46
(2000), 2428–2433.
[190] D. P ETZ , Monotone metrics on matrix spaces, Lin. Alg. Appl.244
(1996), 81–96.
[191] D. P ETZ , “Quantum Information Theory and Quantum Statistics”,
Berlin: Springer, 2008.
[192] C. P IRON , “Foundations of Quantum Physics”, W. A. Benjamin
Inc., London, 1976.
[193] W. P. S CHLEIH and S. M. B ARNETT (eds.), Quantum phase and
phase dependent measurements, Phys. ScriptaT48, (1993).
[194] F. S ELLERI and G. T AROZZI , Quantum mechanics, reality and
separability, La Rivista del Nuovo Cimento2 (1981).
[195] M. D. S RINIV AS, When is a hidden varible theory comparable
with quantum mechanics?, Pramana19 (1982), 159–173.
[196] A. U HLMANN , Density operators as an arena for differential ge-
ometry, Rep. Math. Phys.33 (1993), 253–263.
[197] N. W IENER et al., “Differential Space, Quantum Systems and Pre-
diction”, MIT Press, 1966.
[198] E. P. W IGNER , “Symmetries and Re/g193ections”, Indiana University
Press, Bloomington-London, 1970.
[199] H. M. W ISEMAN and R. B. K ILLIP , Adaptive single-shot phase
measurements: the full quantum theory Phys. Rev. A, 57 (3)
(1998), 2169–2185.
[200] H. P. Y UEN and J. H. S HAPIRO , Quantum statistics of homodyne
and heterodyne detection , In: “Coherence and Quantum Optics”
L. Mandel, E. Wolf (IV . eds.), Plenum Press, New York, 719–727,
1978.

Index
af/g192ne map, 6
angle
canonical measurement, 134
canonical observable, 134
measurement, 153
parameter, 133
angular
momentum, 131
representation, 133
automorphism, 87
Bochner-Khinchin
noncommutative theorem,
201
canonical
commutation relation (CCR),
92
conjugateness, 92
observables, 192
characteristic function
of a state, 201
Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt
inequality, 299
coherent
states, 123
representation, 124
commutation operator, 80
commutator, 60
compatible
measurements, 60
observables, 62
complementary, 281
completeness relation, 42, 101
conjugate linearity, 37
contextuality, 284
convergence of operators, 41
convex
combination, 5
set, 5
coordinate
canonical observable, 97
measurements, 168
parameter, 96
correlation function
of a state, 205
covariance matrix, 221
creation
annihilation operator, 120
/Delta1positive de/g192niteness, 201
density
matrix, 23
operator, 43
detection loophole, 303
deviation function, 147
direct integral of Hilbert spaces,
162
direct sum of Hilbert spaces, 41
displacement operators, 95
dynamical equation, 111
Einstein locality, 302
energy
317

318 Alexander Holevo
observable, 111
representation, 113
entangled state, 298
Euclidean group, 85
extreme point, 7
Fock representation, 119
force
measurement, 233
Galilean group, 85
Gibbs state, 189
Gleason’s theorem, 288
ground state, 118
group
unimodular, 143
group kinematical, 94
group of rotations, 128
Hamiltonian, 109
Heisenberg picture, 111
hidden variables, 32, 283
Hilbert space, 37
in/g192nitesimal generator, 53
information matrix, 237
right, 240
isometric map, 37
joint measurement, 61
joint measurement of coordinate
and velocity
canonical, 108
local unbiasedness, 221
logarithmic derivative
symmetric, 236
right, 240
Mandelstam-Tamm
inequality, 90
mass, 95
matrix elements, 42
maximum-likelihood
approach, 150
mean deviation, 147
mean value of a state, 205
mean value of measurement (ob-
servable), 59
mean-square deviation, 221
measuremant, 4, 12
Bayesian, 147
best unbiased, 221
classical
deterministic, 14
randomized, 17
compatible, 279
covariant, 141
linear, 252
maximal, 292
optimal, 148
simple, 26, 45
unbiased, 167, 220
minimax approach, 148
minimum-uncertainty
states, 100
moments of state, 204
momentum
observable, 97
representation, 100
Naimark’s theorem, 55
noncommutative
Cram´er-Rao inequality, 223
Fourier transform, 197
norm of operator, 39
nonseparability, 298
number of quanta
observable, 120
observable, 59
operator
adjoint, 39, 49
anti-unitary, 87
bounded, 39
compact, 63
Hermitean, 40

319 Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory
Hilbert-Schmidt, 68
isometric, 40
normal, 126
of /g192nite rank, 39
positive, 42
projection, 41
self-adjoint, 50
square-summable, 70
subnormal, 126
symmetric, 49
symplectic, 193
trace-class, 64
unitary, 40
orthogonality relations, 101, 169
parametric (Lie) group, 141
Pauli matrices, 129
phase
canonical measurement, 121
parameter, 121
representation, 122
posterior deviation
operator of, 150
pre-inner product, 55
preparation, 3
prior distribution
Bayes approach, 147
quantum estimation problem, 91
realization of measurement, 55
representation of CCR, 97, 191
resolution of identity
/g192nite, 24
orthogonal, 44
Riesz-Frechet lemma, 38
Schr¨odinger picture, 111
Schr¨odinger representation, 99
shift parameter, 90
measurement, 162
simplex, 7
spectral measure, 47, 51, 54
spectral theorem
/g192nite-dimensional, 9
for Hermitean operators, 47
for self-adjoint operators, 51
for symmetric operators, 54
spin, 132
state, 4, 12
classical, 13
pure, 14
exact, 77
Gaussian, 208
quantum
pure, 23
quasiclassical, 188
stationary subgroup, 142
statistical estimate, 91
statistical model, 12
classical, 15
Kolmogorov, 276
of quantum mechanics, 28
reduction, 18
Wald, 276
Stokes parameters, 12
Stone’s theorem, 53
Stone-von Neumann uniqueness
theorem, 97
symplectic space, 192
tensor product of Hilbert spaces,
56
test, 13
classical, 17
time
canonical observable, 115
measurements, 169
parameter, 112
representation, 116
trace
of matrix, 8
of operator, 42
unbiased estimate, 91

320 Alexander Holevo
uncertainty relation, 60
time-energy, 115
angle-angular momentum, 156
coordinate-momentum, 97
Heisenberg, 92
phase-number of quanta, 158
unitary group, 53
variance of measurement
(observable), 59
weight matrix, 221
Weyl transform, 194

MONOGRAPHS
This series is a collection of monographs on advanced research topics of
current interest in the /g192elds of mathematics and physics.
Published volume
1. A. H OLEVO , Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum The-
ory, 2010. ISBN 978-88-7642-375-8
Volumes published earlier
QUADERNI
E. D E GIORGI ,F .C OLOMBINI ,L .C .P ICCININI , Frontiere orientate di
misura minima e questioni collegate, 1972.
C. M IRANDA , Su alcuni problemi di geometria differenziale in grande
per gli ovaloidi, 1973.
G. P RODI ,A .A MBROSETTI , Analisi non lineare, 1973.
C. M IRANDA , Problemi di esistenza in analisi funzionale, 1975 (out of
print).
I. T. TODOROV ,M .M INTCHEV ,V .B .P ETKOV A, Conformal Invariance
in Quantum Field Theory, 1978.
A. ANDREOTTI ,M .N ACINOVICH , Analytic Convexity and the Principle
of Phragm´en-Lindel¨of, 1980.
S. C AMPANATO , Sistemi ellittici in forma divergenza. Regolarit `a all’in-
terno, 1980.
Topics in Functional Analysis 1980-81 , Contributors: F. S TROCCHI ,E .
ZARANTONELLO ,E .D E GIORGI ,G .D AL MASO ,L .M ODICA , 1981.
G. L ETTA, Martingales et int´egration stochastique, 1984.
Old and New Problems in Fundamental Physics , in honour of G IAN
CARLO WICK , 1986.
Interaction of Radiation with Matter, in honour of A DRIANO GOZZINI ,
1987.

322 Monographs
M. M ´ETIVIER , Stochastic Partial Differential Equations in In/g192nite Di-
mensional Spaces, 1988.
Symmetry in Nature, in honour of L UIGI A. R ADICATI DI BROZOLO ,2
voll., 1989 (reprint 2005).
Nonlinear Analysis, in honour of GIOV ANNI PRODI , 1991 (out of print).
C. L AURENT -THI ´EBAUT ,J .L EITERER , Andreotti-Grauert Theory on
Real Hypersurfaces, 1995.
J. Z ABCZYK , Chance and Decision. Stochastic Control in Discrete Time,
1996 (reprint 2000).
I. E KELAND , Exterior Differential Calculus and Applications to Eco-
nomic Theory, 1998 (2000).
Electrons and Photons in Solids, A V olume in honour of FRANCO BAS-
SANI , 2001.
J. Z ABCZYK , Topics in Stochastic Processes,2004.
N. T OUZI , Stochastic Control Problems, Viscosity Solutions and Appli-
cation to Finance, 2004.
CATTEDRA GALILEIANA
P. L. L IONS , On Euler Equations and Statistical Physics, 1998.
T. B J ¨ORK , A Geometric View of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,
2000 (2001).
F. DELBAEN , Coherent Risk Measures, 2002.
W. S CHACHERMAYER , Portfolio Optimization in Incomplete Financial
Markets, 2004.
D. D UFFIE , Credit Risk Modeling with Af/g192ne Processes,2004.
H. M. S ONER , Stochastic Optimal Control in Finance, 2004 (2005).
LEZIONI LAGRANGE
C. VOISIN , Variations of Hodge Structure of Calabi-Yau Threefolds,1998.
LEZIONI FERMIANE
R. T HOM , Mod`eles math´ematiques de la morphog´en`ese, 1971.
S. AGMON , Spectral Properties of Schr¨odinger Operators and Scattering
Theory, 1975.
M. F. ATIY AH, Geometry of Yang-Mills Fields,1979.
KAC M., Integration in Function Spaces and some of its Applications,
1983 (out of print).

323 Monographs
J. M OSER , Integrable Hamiltonian Systems and Spectral Theory, 1983.
T. K ATO, Abstract Differential Equations and Nonlinear Mixed Prob-
lems, 1988.
W. H. FLEMING , Controlled Markov Processes and Viscosity Solution of
Nonlinear Evolution Equations, 1988.
V. I . ARNOLD , The Theory of Singularities and its Applications, 1991.
J. P. OSTRIKER , Development of Larger-Scale Structure in the Universe,
1993.
S. P. N OVIKOV , Solitons and Geometry, 1994.
L. A. C AFFARELLI , The Obstacle Problem, 1999.